Title: Inductive Deductive Synthesis: Enabling AI to Generate Formally Verified Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.23109v1

Published Time: Mon, 25 May 2026 00:17:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 48

Markdown Content:
# Inductive Deductive Synthesis: Enabling AI to Generate Formally Verified Systems 

Shubham Agarwal ∗,1, Alexander Krentsel ∗,1, Shu Liu ∗,1, Mert Cemri ∗,1,Audrey Cheng 1, Rui Meng 2, Tomas Pfister 2, Chun-Liang Li 2, Sylvia Ratnasamy 1,Aditya Parameswaran 1, Matei Zaharia 1, Ion Stoica 1, Mohsen Lesani 31UC Berkeley 2Google 3UC Santa Cruz 

## Abstract 

AI agents increasingly excel at generating, testing, and refining code. However, they fall short on tasks requiring formal guarantees of full coverage that testing alone cannot provide. Distributed systems are a prime example: properties such as consistency between reads and writes must hold under every possible interleaving of events. Mechanized formal verification can guarantee such correctness, but typically demands months to years of expert effort. As evidence, even SOTA coding agents (Codex with GPT-5.4 and Claude Code with Opus 4.6) succeed on only 2/7 distributed key-value-store specifications. In this paper, we present the first effective approach to addressing this gap, Inductive Deductive Synthesis (IDS), which jointly and incrementally synthesizes implementation and proof, and learns from failed attempts to systematically try promising strategies. Built as an agentic LLM system, IDS achieves 7/7 in about 6.8 hours and $ 106 per spec on average, roughly 200 × faster than expert effort and 17% cheaper than SOTA agents. IDS further incorporates performance feedback into the same loop, yielding implementations up to 3× faster than published verified systems. 1

## 1 Introduction 

Coding agents have made great strides at writing code for many tasks, even running tests to au-tomatically refine their own output [ 4, 3 , 10 , 58 , 44 ]. However, they fall short on tasks requiring correctness guarantees across every possible behavior, rather than just the cases reached during testing. Distributed systems are a prime example: properties such as consistency between subsequent writes and reads must hold under every possible interleaving of messages, failures, and concurrent updates, a combinatorially large space that no realistic test suite can cover [ 23 ]. The consequences of incorrect behavior are severe, ranging from a replicated store that loses data [ 5], to a file system that drops a write [37], to a confidential store that leaks a key. To prevent such catastrophic failures, formal verification techniques can provide exhaustive cor-rectness guarantees. These techniques allow a developer to (1) state a specification, (2) write an implementation, and (3) develop a machine-checkable proof that the implementation satisfies the specification on every possible input [ 7, 12 , 22 , 24 ]. However, adoption of formal methods over the past two decades has been limited due to the immense manual labor required: verifying real-world systems takes months to years of expert effort [21, 25, 9, 16, 55, 26]. Naturally, one may ask, can we simply provide a coding agent with a specification and formal verification tooling, and ask it to build complex systems that provably satisfy that specification? Our experiments demonstrate that the answer is no. We show in §5 that Codex (GPT-5.4) [ 10 ] and  

> ∗Equal contribution.
> 1Code available at https://github.com/skydiscover-ai/skydiscover .Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.23109v1 [cs.AI] 22 May 2026

Claude Code (Opus 4.6) [ 3] fail to generate correct systems for 5 of 7 widely studied distributed key-value-store consistency specifications (e.g., causal consistency, read-your-writes). The failure mode we observe is a structural one: following typical human patterns, agents treat verification as a downstream check on code they have already written. This approach (a) requires writing the whole proof at once, which is exceptionally difficult even for humans 2, and (b) defers all correctness feedback to the end of an implementation, depriving the agent of valuable guiding signals. To address these challenges, we introduce Inductive Deductive Synthesis (IDS), a technique that enables agents to synthesize provably correct complex systems from a specification. Synthesize Code  

> Synthesize Proof
> Lemm. rd_af_inc: admit.
> def inc (s) : … def read (s): …
> Proof Assistant
> Code gives the structure to prove
> Proof reveals unsatisfied parts in code
> writes/refines impl proves code property

Figure 1: Code and proof advance jointly and incremen-tally with IDS; the proof assistant grades each partial step. 

Our key insight is to synthesize both the im-plementation and its proof jointly and incre-mentally (Fig. 1), while learning from failures at each step to guide the search toward promis-ing solutions and away from dead ends. As detailed in §3, every implementation decision (e.g., adding a data structure or modifying control flow) is paired with a corresponding proof update (e.g., adding new constraints or splitting lemmas). IDS offers two benefits: (1) each individual joint step is considerably simpler to prove ,decreasing the complexity of proof generation, and (2) the intermediate partial proofs can be verified with a formal checker to assess the viability of the current design. A negative result rules out a dead-end implementation path before further work is wasted and serves as a counterexample to improve the design going forward. This is akin to “chain-of-thought” [ 53 ], except that the intermediate states are formally encoded and verified. Beyond correctness, this iterative loop also optimizes performance: as soon as a candidate’s implementation is complete, it is benchmarked on a distributed testbed; the performance measurements then further guide the search toward efficient implementations. We instantiate IDS as a multi-agent system (§4), and we evaluate IDS on 7 distributed key-value-store consistency specifications: Chapar’s published causal-consistency spec [ 26 ] plus six new IDS suite 

specs we release with the system (App. I). IDS produces a complete verified implementation on all 7 in about 6.8 hours and $ 106 per spec on average, with no human intervention or fine-tuning. On the two specs our vanilla agent baseline completed, IDS runs 1.6× faster and 17% cheaper. The discovered implementations match or beat hand-written expert references on every spec and reach up to 3× the throughput of Chapar’s published vector-clock reference, a margin we attribute to a design-space search broader than what manual proof allows. As a general prover, IDS achieves state-of-the-art performance on four cross-language verification benchmarks (DafnyBench [ 30 ], miniCodeProps [ 29 ], Verus-Bench [ 57 ], CoqStoq [ 50 ]), beating agentic baselines that share its prompt and underlying model by +10% to +51% . On three further code-and-proof synthesis benchmarks, IDS again leads: 176 /189 on VERINA [ 61 ] (prior 38 /189 ), 

65 /77 on AlgoVeri [62] (prior 31 /77 ), and a perfect 62 /62 on CloverBench [47]. In summary, we make the following contributions in this work: • Inductive Deductive Synthesis (IDS): the first general technique for jointly synthesizing code and machine-checked proof under a partial-proof oracle, with feedback from failures and performance benchmarks in the same loop. • IDS-based multi-agent system: the first agentic system to autonomously generate verified dis-tributed systems. Solves 7/7 consistency specifications where SOTA agents (GPT-5.4, Opus 4.6) solve only 2/7, with up to 3× the throughput of published verified systems. • IDS suite: six new Rocq specifications for distributed key-value-store consistency models, released as an open benchmark for verified-synthesis research. 

## 2 Related Work 

Verified code generation with an LLM has three components: (1) a specification of desired guarantees, (2) an implementation, and (3) a machine-checkable proof that the implementation satisfies the 

> 2Past work [26] reports 9–12 months of expert effort to write a proof for a key-value (KV) store.

2specification. Prior work falls into four threads: three each address one component (specification generation, program generation with an evaluator, automated proof generation), and verified synthesis attempts (2) and (3) jointly. IDS pursues this last class on distributed-systems specifications. 

Specification generation. A complementary line uses LLMs to recover formal specifications from code or intent [ 14 , 54 ]; Clover [ 47 ] generates formal annotations from natural language specifications, and then checks the consistency of code with the formal and natural specifications of Dafny benchmarks. IDS takes such specifications as input rather than producing them. 

Program generation with an evaluator. A separate strand of work treats program construction as search guided by evaluator feedback. Coding agents get feedback from given or self-generated tests [ 58 , 44 ], or from communication with other specialized agents [ 17 , 39 , 56 ]. Algorithmic discov-ery systems use a scoring function to drive evolution [ 41 , 35 ] or deep reinforcement learning [ 31 ]. IDS shares the evaluator-guided search scheme; however, instead of tests or scores, it uses a proof assistant. In contrast to sampled signals (tests over traces, specific inputs, or estimated scores), type-checked proofs guarantee correctness on all inputs. 

Automated proof generation. Most prior LLM-for-verification work fixes the implementation and specification, asking the model only for the proof. For SMT-backed languages such as Dafny [ 24 ]and Verus [ 22 ], recent systems synthesize the loop invariants and assertions a verifier needs, either via compiler-feedback loops [ 57 ] or targeted invariant generation [ 34 ]. For tactic-driven assistants such as Lean [ 12 ] and Rocq [ 7], prover systems have been trained on databases of prior formal proofs [ 59 ], natural-language proofs [ 52 ], and conjectured theorems [ 13 ]. Approaches differ in scope: some generate full proofs in one pass [ 40 , 51 , 15 ]; others decompose the proof into sub-goals [ 27 , 63 , 19 ]; tactic-level methods iteratively predict and repair the next proof step from the current proof state and verifier feedback [ 18 , 60 , 49 , 36 , 42 ]. IDS differs by jointly generating the implementation and proof, and further optimizing performance. 

Verified synthesis. The long-standing goal of producing a program and its correctness proof from a specification alone goes back to deductive synthesis [ 33 , 38 ] and counterexample-guided inductive synthesis [ 45 , 46 ], but the inference rules and candidate-search space confined results to small individual functions. The LLM era rekindles this dream. VERINA [ 61 ] provides a benchmark to evaluate specification, code, and proof generation, evaluates existing tools, and underscores significant challenges for automatic provers. Recent LLM-driven verified-synthesis work targets SMT-backed languages: AlphaVerus [ 1] bootstraps verified Verus code via self-improving translation, scaling to function-level tasks. At the other extreme, hand-built verified distributed systems, such as IronFleet’s Paxos-replicated state machines [ 16 ], Verdi’s Raft [ 55 ], FSCQ’s crash-safe file system [ 9 ], Anvil’s verified Kubernetes controllers [ 48 ], Chapar’s causally-consistent KV stores [ 26 ], and Iris-based concurrent and distributed verification [ 20 , 43 , 8] demonstrate that machine-checkable guarantees 

are achievable at systems scale, but at months to years of expert proof effort. IDS shows that verified synthesis need not be small-scale or slow: it automatically generates implementations and their machine-checkable correctness proofs for distributed key-value stores in hours rather than months. 

## 3 Background and Overview 

We begin with a short introduction to formal verification. A formally verified system has three pieces. The specification is a precise mathematical statement of correctness; the implementation is the code that runs; and the proof is a machine-checkable argument that, on every input, the implementation matches the specification. Historically, humans wrote all three; IDS takes a human-written spec and automatically produces both implementation and proof, using LLM agents driven by the proof assistant Rocq [ 7]. We show a simple example: a counter , a state machine with two operations ( inc 

to increment the count and read to return it) starting from an initial state init .Figure 2 shows the counter’s specification (left), a partial synthesis (center), and a complete synthesis 

(right). The spec states two properties, or “axioms,” about init , inc , and read : reading the initial state returns zero, and reading after an increment returns one more than reading before. In the partial synthesis, inc ’s body and the read_inc theorem are deferred via Admitted (a placeholder for unfinished work), but Rocq still accepts the file: the chosen representation (a list whose length encodes the count) is consistent with the work so far. The complete synthesis fills in the deferred pieces. The representation is a free choice; any state satisfying the axioms works, though nat (natural numbers) is more efficient. 3Specification 

> Module Type CounterSpec. Parameter t : Type. Parameter init : t. Parameter inc : t -> t. Parameter read : t -> nat. Axiom read_init : read init = 0. Axiom read_inc : forall s, read (inc s) = S (read s). End CounterSpec.

Partial impl. & proof 

> Definition t := list unit. Definition init : t := nil. Definition inc (s : t) : t. Admitted. Definition read (s : t) := length s. Theorem read_init : read init = 0. Proof. reflexivity. Qed. Theorem read_inc : forall s, read (inc s) = S (read s). Admitted.

Complete impl. & proof 

> Definition t := list unit. Definition init : t := nil. Definition inc (s : t) := tt::s. Definition read (s : t) := length s. Theorem read_init : read init = 0. Proof. reflexivity. Qed. Theorem read_inc : forall s, read (inc s) = S (read s). Proof. intros s. unfold read, inc. simpl. reflexivity. Qed.

Figure 2: Counter specification (left), partial synthesis (center, yellow = Admitted ), and complete 

synthesis (right, green = filled in). Rocq accepts both files. 

Rocq’s type-checker as an oracle, including for partial work. Rocq’s checker accepts adeclaration/proof if and only if it satisfies its stated type/proposition, and rejects with a precise diagnostic otherwise. There are no false positives or false negatives, in contrast to tests (only the inputs tried), static analysis (over-approximate), or LLM-as-judge (guesses). The verdict also extends to partial code, as the center column of Figure 2 illustrates: unproven obligations are stated as deferred holes (Admitted lemmas or stub function bodies), and the file still type-checks. (App. G walks a longer all_less_than example through this progression.) IDS leverages the type-checker as an oracle to drive a deductive synthesis [ 33 ]: at every step, the agent extends the partial implementation and proof, then asks Rocq whether the partial state still type-checks. A yes keeps the design on track; a no rules it out before further work is committed. If progress stalls (measured by the number of partial proofs left empty), IDS reverts to an earlier state. 

From counter to distributed stores. IDS applies this loop at scale. For distributed systems, the specification grows from simple axioms to conditions over executions involving messages, clients, replicas, and failures. For example, read_inc in a distributed setting becomes read-your-writes: a client that increments then reads must observe its own increments. The implementation grows from a few-line module to a multi-replica protocol with larger state, multiple message types, and handlers. For example, a replica can no longer store one nat ; it must keep a vector with one entry per client, tracking the increments received from that client. On a request carrying the client’s increment count, the replica can then tell whether it is up-to-date enough to serve, providing read-your-writes. The proof grows from simple tactics to an inductive simulation argument (an induction linking implementation and spec states) with dozens of helper lemmas. Such implementations span a large, subtle design space with widely varying performance, explored by decades of research. §4 describes the agent that drives this process, App. I gives the full specifications, and §5 reports results. 

## 4 IDS Agentic Architecture 

Overview. We now describe how we realize IDS as an agentic architecture (Fig. 3). Given a system interface and property specifications, the framework orchestrates multiple LLM agents guided by verification and performance feedback to generate an efficient, mechanically-checked implementation. This architecture relies on a powerful synergy: deductive synthesis constructs the code and proof under a given strategy, while inductive synthesis discovers better strategies from failed attempts. Inspired by deductive synthesis [ 33 , 32 ], IDS introduces Deductive Synthesis Agents (DSAs, 1 )to incrementally synthesize implementations from specifications. Guided by a strategy, a DSA recursively decomposes a component and its specification into sub-components using placeholders. The DSA constructs proofs assuming these sub-components are correct, repeating this process down to trivial elements. The Rocq type-checker ( 2 ) continuously verifies both complete and partial proofs throughout this decomposition. 4Param t: Type. Param inc: t -> t. Param rd: t -> n. Axiom: rd (inc s) = S (rd s)       

> Workspace B
> Feedback (oracle)
> Workspace A
> Specification
> Type check
> Vacuous proof, etc.
> System Builder
> Final Solution
> Inductive Synthesis Agent (roles)
> Impl done
> Code & Proof
> Spawn new workspace
> Lemma Guidance
> –Coordinator–
> Perf. metrics (ops/s, etc.)
> Deductive Synthesis Agent
> Rocq Type-Checker
> Audit Step
> Benchmark Harness
> 1234
> Proposer Reloader
> Def mthd := _. Lem m_ok : P Prod. _ Qed. Def step := _. Admitted .
> CounterSpec.v
> impl.v
> Impl + Proof done
> 5
> AB

Figure 3: IDS’ agentic architecture; code and proof advance jointly throughout. A coordinator runs parallel 1 Deductive Synthesis Agents (DSAs); each step is graded by 2 Rocq’s type-checker, completed implementations are 3 benchmarked, and closed proofs are 4 audited for non-vacuity. On failure, the 5 Inductive Synthesis Agent (ISA) intervenes: A proposer adds helper lemmas on tactical stalls; B reloader respawns a DSA with a fresh design on strategic dead-ends. While this deductive approach succeeds when guided by a sound search strategy (e.g., a high-level design or proof approach in the prompt), a DSA can stall under a dead-end strategy. Inspired by inductive synthesis [ 46 , 45 , 11 ], IDS introduces an Inductive Synthesis Agent (ISA, 5 ) that learns from failed strategies to propose more promising ones. The ISA receives feedback when a DSA stalls or yields poor performance. It then intervenes in two roles: a proposer for tactical, local adjustments ( A ), and a reloader for strategic, global shifts to entirely new designs ( B ). 

Coordinator. The coordinator launches and orchestrates the DSAs and the ISA, maintaining overall system state and managing a parallel pool of workers. While DSAs can report localized errors, they cannot detect strategic dead-ends on their own. The coordinator monitors progress to identify stagnating agents, recording failed strategies and invoking the ISA to propose new ones before respawning the DSA. To ensure the synthesized system is not only correct but also performant, the coordinator benchmarks each candidate eagerly, even before its proof completes. It extracts the implementation to executable code and runs the benchmark harness ( 3 , §5.1). The measurements are fed back to the ISA so that its future strategies guide the DSA toward more efficient implementations. Once a proof closes (i.e., the proof completes with no remaining Admitted placeholders), the coordinator audits the result to ensure it is fully verified, non-trivial, and implements the expected interface ( 4 ). Finally, it returns the most efficient verified solution found within the time budget. 

DSA: Deductive Synthesis Agent. Off-the-shelf LLMs, pretrained on a large corpus of programs and proofs, are well-equipped to guide synthesis search, as we empirically demonstrate in §5.2. To harness this capability, we design the DSA as a generic LLM coding agent operating under strict constraints: implementations must be well-typed before proving, specifications cannot be altered, final outputs must contain no unproven assumptions, and system state must remain bounded. At each node of the search tree, the agent can take the following actions to advance the synthesis: (1) define partial implementations, (2) close open proof branches, or (3) decompose complex lemmas into simpler helper lemmas. After each step, the implementation and proof are passed to Rocq’s type-checker. If there are no errors, the state is saved, building a search tree of well-typed partial implementations and proofs. If errors occur, the agent can take the following actions: (1) repair the failed step by attempting a different approach, or (2) revert to an earlier node in the search tree. 

ISA: Inductive Synthesis Agent. The DSA cannot reliably step back and pivot a failing strategy on its own. The ISA fills this gap as a stateless LLM agent that reasons over a strategy summary and proposes new approaches across two decision horizons: • Proposer (tactical). Triggered when the strategy is promising but the DSA is stuck on a specific proof. The proposer offers finer-grained assistance, suggesting helper lemmas and structural decompositions from a holistic view of the proof state. 5• Reloader (strategic). Triggered when the strategy is a dead-end or slow. Rather than allowing the DSA to endlessly apply small fixes, the reloader intervenes by respawning the DSA with an entirely new high-level design. 

## 5 Evaluation 

We evaluate IDS on 7 Rocq specifications of distributed key-value-store consistency: Chapar’s published causal-consistency spec [ 26 ] and 6 new IDS suite specs co-developed with a formal-verification and distributed-systems expert (App. I). We extract synthesized implementations from Gallina to OCaml and benchmark them on a 5-VM Google Cloud cluster under a distributed runtime against hand-written expert references. For synthesis, we compare against SOTA coding agents, Codex (GPT-5.4) [ 10 ] and Claude Code (Opus 4.6) [ 3], under the same prompt and budget. We answer three questions in the following subsections: • Q1. Does IDS handle hard specifications? IDS succeeds on all 7 in about 6.8 hours and $ 106 per spec on average (max 11 h, $ 155 ), versus 2 of 7 each for Codex and Claude Code under the same prompt and budget (§5.2). • Q2. Are the synthesized implementations performant? They match or beat every expert-implemented reference: 3× throughput on Chapar’s vector-clock reference, 1.4× on IDS suite CC and monotonic reads, comparable on read-your-writes (within 20% ), and sustained throughput on MW and RYW+MW where the reference times out (§5.3). • Q3. Which of IDS’ design decisions drive these results? The joint code-and-proof co-design, the ISA’s proposer and reloader roles, the audit step, the Rocq feedback to the DSA, and the performance feedback to the ISA each contribute consequentially. The DSA alone also sets a new state-of-the-art on four public proof benchmarks across four languages (§5.4). 

5.1 Experimental Setup Specifications. Each specification is a high-level reference implementation of a key-value store; its state type and operations define the consistency notion. IDS takes a specification and produces a refining implementation paired with a machine-checked proof of correctness on every input. Chapar [ 26 ] provides a published causal-consistency specification (CC). The other six form the IDS suite benchmark dataset that we release alongside the system (App. I): read-your-writes (RYW), monotonic writes (MW), monotonic reads (MR), their composition (RYW+MW), and two causal-consistency variants: IDS suite CC and LCC ( labeled causal consistency, where each client subscribes to a set of topic labels and sees causality enforced only on those labels). The IDS suite spans the space of session consistency guarantees. To the best of our knowledge, no prior benchmark provides verified Rocq artifacts across this range. Difficulty grows in three tiers: simple (RYW, MW), specs whose proofs need many cases (MR, RYW+MW), and specs that also manage explicit dependency sets (CC, LCC). A side-by-side summary of all seven specifications appears in App. A. 

Harness and metrics. Verified Rocq implementations are extracted to OCaml (via Rocq’s built-in extraction, an automatic compilation pass from Gallina to OCaml) and run under a distributed runtime on a 5-VM Google Cloud cluster. Each run executes 4 parallel workers × 1,000 random operations; we sweep across put rates, and run a separate scaling sweep at put rate = 50% over 

N ∈ { 1,000 , 2,000 , 5,000 , 20 ,000 }. App. D covers the cluster topology and toolchain. Every method runs under the same per-spec wall-clock and dollar budget. Runs that exhaust either budget are considered failed runs. Each cell aggregates three independent runs, and we report pass rate (successes out of three), time-to-finish, dollar cost, throughput, p99 latency, peak memory, and ops-per-worker scaling, all as medians. 

Baselines. The synthesis baselines are Codex (GPT-5.4) [ 10 ] and Claude Code (Opus 4.6) [ 3]. Both run under the same prompt and budget as IDS’ DSA, so the comparison isolates the agentic architecture. Codex is also IDS’ primary backend. For performance comparisons, the references are the hand-written expert implementations: Chapar’s two published references (vector-clock and list-based) [ 26 ], and the expert-written reference released alongside each IDS suite specification, except LCC, a custom spec with no expert reference. For the cross-language evaluation, we adopt four public verification benchmarks (DafnyBench, Verus-Bench, miniCodeProps, CoqStoq) across the languages Dafny, Verus, Lean, and Rocq. We compare against the strongest published prior 6Table 1: IDS succeeds on all seven specifications (≥ 2/3 runs) versus only 2 of 7 each for Codex and Claude Code, while using less total wall-clock and fewer total dollars ; on every spec where any method succeeds, IDS is also faster and cheaper . pass rate = # successes out of 3 (green: 

≥ 2/3; red: < 2/3); hours = median wall-clock until a successful run (Rocq Qed accepted, audit step passed, extracted OCaml runs on the harness); cost = median dollars per run. All methods share the same model, verifier, pass criterion, and per-spec budget; relative std across runs is ≤ 7% .                                                                                   

> Codex Claude Code IDS
> Specification Pass rate ↑Hours ↓Cost ($) ↓Pass rate ↑Hours ↓Cost ($) ↓Pass rate ↑Hours ↓Cost ($) ↓
> Chapar
> Causal Consistency 0/3 12 160 0/3 11 165 3/3 10 148
> IDS suite
> Read-Your-Writes 3/3 460 3/3 370 3/3 252
> Monotonic Reads 0/3 12 130 0/3 10 140 3/3 7102
> Monotonic Writes 2/3 565 3/3 470 3/3 358
> RYW + MW 0/3 9125 1/3 6110 3/3 593
> Causal Consistency 0/3 12 160 0/3 11 170 2/3 11 155
> LCC 0/3 13 180 0/3 11 160 3/3 10 136 Total across specs 2/7 67 $880 2/7 56 $885 7/7 48 $744

tool for each benchmark. App. E covers three more (VERINA, AlgoVeri, CloverBench). These cross-language benchmarks target function- and algorithm-level tasks, smaller and simpler in scope than the real-world distributed systems above. 

5.2 Synthesis correctness 

IDS returns verified implementations for all seven specifications, a 3.5× pass rate over the 2 out of 7

that each of Codex and Claude Code reach under the same prompt and budget. Even on the two specs (RYW and MW) where both baselines succeed, IDS is 1.6× faster and 17% cheaper (Table 1). IDS succeeds by storing the data in a way that lets the proof split into smaller, manageable cases (e.g., one entry per key on Chapar CC, or one entry per (key, client) pair on monotonic reads); the baselines keep the spec’s default layout, never backtrack, and stall on the same hard cases. We also evaluate two LLM-only baselines that ask Codex for an implementation only (the standard coding-agent task), with best-of-N =100 generation, on 4 properties (RYW, MW, MR, CC). Setting 1 (spec-given): 

Codex receives the formal Rocq specification. Setting 2 (vibe coding): Codex receives only a natural-language paragraph of the property. We then check each selected implementation two ways: an adversarial multi-client trace flags implementations that violate the spec on a single execution, and a refinement proof against the spec catches the rest. Spec-given Codex passes both checks on 1/4

properties; vibe coding on 0/4 (App. C). Even given the formal spec and 100 candidates per property, the LLM alone cannot produce implementations that are guaranteed correct on every input. 

Chapar causal consistency. IDS closes Chapar’s published causal-consistency proof, originally a major hand-written verification [ 26 ], in 10 hours and $148 (roughly 200 × faster than the cited 9–12 months of expert effort), while both agent baselines fail to finish within 1.2× our wall-clock and cost. IDS succeeded by changing how the data was stored. Its first attempt kept each replica’s state as one big object, so proving correctness required reasoning about every key and message together, and the proof got stuck. IDS backtracked, gave each key its own small table, and the proof then split into one easy case per key. The full trajectory and the per-family lemma counts are given in App. B. 

IDS suite specifications. IDS handles the four harder IDS suite specifications (monotonic reads, RYW+MW, LCC, and IDS suite CC) in 5 to 11 hours per spec, with 3-of-3 pass rates on the first three and 2-of-3 on IDS suite CC. In comparison, Codex never succeeds, and Claude Code succeeds only once, on RYW+MW. The same Chapar pattern recurs: the first design gets stuck on the spec’s default layout, then IDS backtracks and rebuilds the data so the proof splits into smaller cases, for instance one entry per (key, client) on monotonic reads, or one case per message on the two CC variants. Per-specification details are reported in App. B. 720 30 40 50 60 70                 

> put rate (%)
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> throughput (kops/s)
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> put rate (%)
> 0
> 50
> 100
> p99 latency ( μs)
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> put rate (%)
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> memory peak (MB)
> 1K 2K 5K 20K
> ops per worker (N)
> 0
> 50
> 100
> throughput (kops/s)
> Causal Consistency Monotonic Reads IDS reference

Figure 4: Throughput, p99 latency, and peak memory vs. put rate, and throughput vs. ops-per-worker 

N , for IDS suite CC and monotonic reads. Solid = IDS; dashed = reference (function-as-map for both). The per-spec breakdown for all seven specifications appears in §D.1. 

5.3 Runtime performance 

IDS’ synthesized implementations match or beat every prior reference: 3× throughput on Chapar’s vector-clock reference, 1.4× on IDS suite CC and monotonic reads, comparable on read-your-writes (within 20% ), and 152 k and 139 k ops/s on MW and RYW+MW where the reference times out at every put rate (§D.1). We compare on throughput, p99 latency, peak memory, and ops-per-worker scaling. Figure 4 shows IDS suite CC and monotonic reads vs. the references, and the full per-spec breakdown is in §D.1. The gap follows from one mechanism: IDS’ data-store representations are bounded, while the references’ grow with workload size. These representations emerged from the joint code+proof loop: the proof obligation drove the agent to them (§5.2). The performance feedback from the benchmark harness then steers the agent toward the fastest among multiple verifying candidates (§5.4). 

IDS suite CC. Both implementations enforce causality with one timestamp per client; the data store differs. The reference’s function-from-key-to-value extracts to OCaml as a chain that grows per put (every get walks it), while IDS uses a balanced-tree map where a lookup costs at most the tree depth. IDS reaches up to 1.4× peak throughput at low put rate where gets dominate, with p99 latency up to 1.7× lower. The gap narrows at high put rate as broadcast becomes the bottleneck; tail latency tracks the same effect, rising with put rate on both implementations as broadcast queue waits grow. Peak memory is comparable at 1k ops per worker, since the vector-clock state is bounded by client count rather than put rate; larger workloads would push it upward. On ops-per-worker scaling, the reference’s throughput collapses by more than half from 1k to 20 k ops per worker while IDS loses only about a quarter. 

Other IDS suite specifications. Unlike CC, these specs only need per-client guarantees, so they do not pay CC’s per-write cross-client coordination cost; their tail latency stays flat across put rate (Figure 4, MR). On the other IDS suite specs, IDS ranges from comparable on read-your-writes (chain stays short) to a gap large enough that the reference times out at every put rate on the monotonic-write specs (MW, RYW+MW). The four with prior references (RYW, MW, MR, RYW+MW) share the closure-chain mechanism: the reference’s function-from-key-to-value extracts as a chain that grows per put; IDS replaces it with a flat list or balanced tree, and the speedup tracks how often the chain is walked. On the monotonic reads benchmark, a get in the reference walks every operation, so IDS outperforms it by 1.4×.

5.4 Ablations and Generalization 

The joint step-wise discovery of code and proof is the key design decision behind IDS. We ablate this joint design itself ( −J), the ISA’s proposer ( −P) and reloader ( −R), the coordinator’s audit step ( −A), and the Rocq feedback to the DSA ( −VF) across the seven key-value store specs and VERINA’s 

189 Lean tasks (Table 2). We also evaluate the DSA alone and IDS’ prover component decoupled from the rest of the system on four cross-language proof benchmarks (DafnyBench, miniCodeProps, Verus-Bench, CoqStoq), where it sets a new state-of-the-art on each. 8full −J −P −R −A −VF Chapar CC 3/3 0/3 0/3 0/3 1/3 0/3 RYW 3/3 2/3 2/3 3/3 3/3 1/3 MW 3/3 1/3 2/3 2/3 2/3 0/3 RYW+MW 3/3 0/3 1/3 2/3 1/3 0/3 MR 3/3 1/3 0/3 1/3 0/3 0/3 IDS suite CC 2/3 0/3 0/3 0/3 0/3 0/3 LCC 3/3 0/3 0/3 0/3 0/3 0/3 VERINA 176 160 150 167 176 110 

Table 2: Component ablations: # successes from 3 runs ( 189 

tasks for VERINA). Chapar RYW MW RYW+     

> MW
> MR IDS suite
> CC
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> kops/s
> 2.22×
> 1.48× 1.36× 1.17× 1.27×
> 1.26×

Figure 5: Performance-feedback ablation at put = 60% :IDS (solid) vs. no-feedback (hatched). Dafny     

> miniCP
> Verus
> CoqStoq 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> pass rate (%)  88 100 149 97
> Prior SOTA
> Codex
> Claude Code IDS

Figure 6: Cross-language suc-cess rate (%) on 4 verification benchmarks; labels are # of suc-cesses. 

Architecture ablations. Without joint discovery, only RYW succeeds in a majority of runs: Chapar CC, RYW+MW, IDS suite CC, and LCC drop to 0 out of 3, and VERINA falls to 85% (−8% from full IDS’ 93% ). This is because a fixed implementation limits the proof phase. On Chapar CC, −Jcommits to the global per-replica state closest to the spec. Full IDS reloads to per-key entries when the proof stalls. The audit step catches trivial solutions that pass Rocq’s type-checker: on IDS suite CC, an agent without auditing once shipped a put-guard returning false unconditionally, with the theorem being trivially satisfied. On the other hand, cells under −A count only audited successful runs. Ablations of the proposer and reloader each drop pass rate on the four hardest specs (Chapar CC, MR, IDS suite CC, LCC), taking VERINA to 79% (−14% ) under −P and to 88% (−5% ) under −R. The Rocq feedback to the DSA is the most consequential single component: replacing the structured Rocq diagnostic (goal, hypotheses, tactic backtrace) with only an accept/reject drops every spec to at most 1 of 3 successful runs and VERINA to 58% (−35% ). 

Performance-feedback ablation. Without performance feedback ( −PF), the agent commits to the first implementation and proof that passes the type-checker and misses the course-corrections seen in §5.3. As Fig. 5 shows, full IDS is on average 1.42 × faster than −PF across the six specs with reference baselines (Chapar CC, RYW, MW, RYW+MW, MR, IDS suite CC). 

DSA as a general prover. The DSA’s effectiveness is not specific to IDS’ synthesis loop or to Rocq: applied alone to public verification benchmarks across four languages, it sets a new state-of-the-art on each (Figure 6, Table 7). It saturates miniCodeProps ( 100 of 100 ) and Verus-Bench ( 149 of 150 ), and beats prior SOTA by 36 to 69% on DafnyBench and CoqStoq. IDS’ agentic architecture brings further gain: full IDS adds +10% on DafnyBench, +20% on miniCodeProps, and +51% on CoqStoq over Codex under the same prompt, while a baseline-model swap (Codex → Claude under the same prompt, no IDS architecture) gains at most 6% on any of these four benchmarks. IDS also reaches state-of-the-art on all three code-and-proof benchmarks: 176 /189 on VERINA (prior SOTA 38 ), 

65 /77 on AlgoVeri ( 2× prior SOTA 31 ), and a full 62 /62 on CloverBench (Table 7; detail in App. E). 

## 6 Discussion and Conclusion 

IDS is language- and problem-agnostic. IDS as a technique depends on neither the verification backend nor the problem domain. The backend need only support (i) mechanical checking of partial proofs, (ii) a programmatic interface an LLM agent can drive, and (iii) executable extraction of verified implementations for performance feedback; Lean [ 12 ] and Verus [ 22 ] both qualify, and we expect IDS to transfer to either without structural changes. The problem domain need only admit a machine-checkable formal specification and a way to benchmark candidate implementations. We chose Rocq for the maturity of its ecosystem, and we chose distributed key-value stores because the literature already provided a complete formal specification for one consistency model; following its structure, we contribute six additional specifications covering other consistency properties (App. I). 

Limitations. Our work has three main limitations. First, IDS requires a formal Rocq specification as input; writing complete formal specifications for distributed systems requires substantial expert effort, a challenge we return to below. Second, the seven specifications we evaluate cover correctness-critical behavior but not the full operational envelope of a production KV store; they do not define interfaces for scaling out (adding or removing nodes at runtime), reconfiguration, fault recovery, or informal but practically necessary behavior such as logging and observability endpoints. Given a 9richer specification that captures these aspects, we see no reason IDS would not apply unchanged, but evaluating this is left to future work. Third, our empirical evaluation covers the distributed key-value store problem only, leaving validation on other domains (e.g., OS protocols, cryptographic primitives) to future work. App. H discusses additional limitations and broader impacts. 

The specification bottleneck. While IDS automates the synthesis of verified implementations, writing the formal specification itself remains the largest open problem: accurately capturing a system’s intended behavior in a machine-checkable form is hard, and any correctness guarantee is only as strong as the specification it is checked against. We envision two directions for closing this gap. First, adversarial specification synthesis , in which an LLM agent collaborates with a human stakeholder in natural language, iteratively probing intent and surfacing ambiguities until a formal specification emerges. Second, specification extraction from existing systems , in which an agent recovers the correctness properties of a deployed implementation while leaving the design space open, so that IDS can synthesize alternative implementations that satisfy the same properties with better performance. We are actively pursuing both directions, which we plan to report on in future work. 

Conclusion. Verified systems construction has traditionally required months to years of expert effort. IDS condenses this timeline to mere hours by replacing human labor with compute. By providing an LLM coding agent with fast and exact correctness feedback without false positives, IDS transforms the joint code-and-proof construction into an automated search problem. This shifts vibe coding to verified coding by using LLMs to directly build type-safe systems that are machine-checked against a formal specification, effectively eliminating silent bugs and unverified assumptions. Crucially, this methodology generalizes to any domain with a machine-checkable correctness oracle, including OS kernels, compilers, cryptographic protocols, and hardware. Ultimately, IDS shows that verified software generation is transitioning from a human-labor bottleneck to a compute-driven approach, paving the way for the broad adoption of verified system synthesis. 

## Acknowledgments 

This research is supported by NSF (IFML) CCF-2019844 and gifts from Accenture, AMD, Anyscale, Broadcom Inc., Google, IBM, Intel, Intesa Sanpaolo, Lambda, Mibura Inc., Samsung SDS, and SAP. We also thank our Sky Lab and NetSys colleagues at UC Berkeley for fruitful discussions that shaped this paper. 

## References               

> [1] Pranjal Aggarwal, Bryan Parno, and Sean Welleck. AlphaVerus: Bootstrapping formally verified code generation through self-improving translation and treefinement. ICML , 2025. arXiv:2412.06176. [2] Mustaque Ahamad, Gil Neiger, James E Burns, Prince Kohli, and Phillip W Hutto. Causal memory: Definitions, implementation, and programming. Distributed Computing , 9(1), 1995. [3] Anthropic. Claude Code: Anthropic’s agentic coding system. https://www.anthropic.com/product/ claude-code , 2025. [4] Anysphere. Cursor: The AI code editor. https://cursor.com , 2025. [5] Peter Bailis and Kyle Kingsbury. The network is reliable. Commun. ACM , 57(9):48–55, September 2014. [6] Debangshu Banerjee, Olivier Bouissou, and Stefan Zetzsche. DafnyPro: Llm-assisted automated verifica-tion for Dafny programs. 2026. POPL Dafny Workshop; arXiv:2601.05385. [7] Yves Bertot and Pierre Castéran. Interactive Theorem Proving and Program Development: Coq’Art: The Calculus of Inductive Constructions . Texts in Theoretical Computer Science. Springer, 2004. [8] Tej Chajed, Joseph Tassarotti, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. Verifying concurrent, crash-safe systems with perennial. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles ,SOSP ’19, page 243–258, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. [9] Haogang Chen, Daniel Ziegler, Tej Chajed, Adam Chlipala, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. Using crash hoare logic for certifying the FSCQ file system. In Ethan L. Miller and Steven Hand, editors,
> Proceedings of the 25th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP 2015, Monterey, CA, USA, October 4-7, 2015 , pages 18–37. ACM, 2015.

10 [10] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large language models trained on code. 2021. arXiv:2107.03374. [11] Edmund Clarke, Orna Grumberg, Somesh Jha, Yuan Lu, and Helmut Veith. Counterexample-guided abstraction refinement. In International Conference on Computer Aided Verification , pages 154–169. Springer, 2000. [12] Leonardo de Moura and Sebastian Ullrich. The Lean 4 theorem prover and programming language. In André Platzer and Geoff Sutcliffe, editors, Automated Deduction — CADE 28 — 28th International Conference on Automated Deduction, Virtual Event, July 12–15, 2021, Proceedings , volume 12699 of 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 625–635. Springer, 2021. [13] Kefan Dong and Tengyu Ma. Stp: Self-play llm theorem provers with iterative conjecturing and proving. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 14114–14136. PMLR, 2025. [14] Madeline Endres, Sarah Fakhoury, Saikat Chakraborty, and Shuvendu K. Lahiri. Can large language models transform natural language intent into formal method postconditions? In Proc. ACM Softw. Eng. (FSE) , 2024. arXiv:2310.01831. [15] Emily First, Markus N. Rabe, Talia Ringer, and Yuriy Brun. Baldur: Whole-proof generation and repair with large language models. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , ESEC/FSE 2023, page 1229–1241, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. [16] Chris Hawblitzel, Jon Howell, Manos Kapritsos, Jacob R. Lorch, Bryan Parno, Michael Lowell Roberts, Srinath T. V. Setty, and Brian Zill. IronFleet: proving practical distributed systems correct. In Proceedings of the 25th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP 2015, Monterey, CA, USA, October 4-7, 2015 . ACM, 2015. [17] Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jiaqi Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Jinlin Wang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng Xiao, Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. MetaGPT: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In ICLR ,2024. arXiv:2308.00352. [18] Thomas Hubert, Rishi Mehta, Laurent Sartran, Miklós Z Horváth, Goran Žuži´ c, Eric Wieser, Aja Huang, Julian Schrittwieser, Yannick Schroecker, Hussain Masoom, et al. Olympiad-level formal mathematical reasoning with reinforcement learning. Nature , pages 1–3, 2025. [19] Albert Q. Jiang, Sean Welleck, Jin Peng Zhou, Wenda Li, Jiacheng Liu, Mateja Jamnik, Timothée Lacroix, Yuhuai Wu, and Guillaume Lample. Draft, sketch, and prove: Guiding formal theorem provers with informal proofs. In ICLR , 2023. arXiv:2210.12283. [20] Ralf Jung, David Swasey, Filip Sieczkowski, Kasper Svendsen, Aaron Turon, Lars Birkedal, and Derek Dreyer. Iris: Monoids and invariants as an orthogonal basis for concurrent reasoning. In Sriram K. Rajamani and David Walker, editors, Proceedings of the 42nd Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 2015, Mumbai, India, January 15-17, 2015 , pages 637–650. ACM, 2015. [21] Gerwin Klein, Kevin Elphinstone, Gernot Heiser, June Andronick, David A. Cock, Philip Derrin, Dham-mika Elkaduwe, Kai Engelhardt, Rafal Kolanski, Michael Norrish, Thomas Sewell, Harvey Tuch, and Simon Winwood. seL4: Formal verification of an OS kernel. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP 2009, Big Sky, Montana, USA, October 11–14, 2009 , pages 207–220. ACM, 2009. [22] Andrea Lattuada, Travis Hance, Jay Bosamiya, Matthias Brun, Chanhee Cho, Hayley LeBlanc, Pranav Srinivasan, Reto Achermann, Tej Chajed, Chris Hawblitzel, Jon Howell, Jacob R. Lorch, Oded Padon, and Bryan Parno. Verus: A practical foundation for systems verification. In Emmett Witchel, Christopher J. Rossbach, Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau, and Kimberly Keeton, editors, Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 30th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP 2024, Austin, TX, USA, November 4-6, 2024 ,pages 438–454. ACM, 2024. 

11 [23] Tanakorn Leesatapornwongsa, Jeffrey F. Lukman, Shan Lu, and Haryadi S. Gunawi. TaxDC: A taxonomy of non-deterministic concurrency bugs in datacenter distributed systems. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) , pages 517–530, 2016. [24] K. Rustan M. Leino. Dafny: An automatic program verifier for functional correctness. In Edmund M. Clarke and Andrei Voronkov, editors, Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Reasoning — 16th International Conference, LPAR-16, Dakar, Senegal, April 25–May 1, 2010, Revised Selected Papers ,volume 6355 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 348–370. Springer, 2010. [25] Xavier Leroy. Formal verification of a realistic compiler. Communications of the ACM , 52(7):107–115, 2009. [26] Mohsen Lesani, Christian J. Bell, and Adam Chlipala. Chapar: certified causally consistent distributed key-value stores. In Rastislav Bodík and Rupak Majumdar, editors, Proceedings of the 43rd Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 2016, St. Petersburg, FL, USA, January 20 - 22, 2016 , pages 357–370. ACM, 2016. [27] Zenan Li, Ziran Yang, Haoyu Zhao, Andrew Zhao, Shange Tang, Kaiyu Yang, Aarti Gupta, Zhendong Su, Chi Jin, et al. Goedel-code-prover: Hierarchical proof search for open state-of-the-art code verification. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.19329 , 2026. [28] Wyatt Lloyd, Michael J. Freedman, Michael Kaminsky, and David G. Andersen. Stronger semantics for low-latency geo-replicated storage. In Proc. NSDI , 2013. [29] Evan Lohn and Sean Welleck. miniCodeProps: A minimal benchmark for proving code properties. 2024. arXiv:2406.11915. [30] Chloe Loughridge, Qinyi Sun, Seth Ahrenbach, Federico Cassano, Chuyue Sun, Ying Sheng, Anish Mudide, Md Rakib Hossain Misu, Nada Amin, and Max Tegmark. DafnyBench: A benchmark for formal software verification. 2024. arXiv:2406.08467. [31] Daniel J. Mankowitz, Andrea Michi, Anton Zhernov, Marco Gelmi, Marco Selvi, Cosmin Paduraru, Edouard Leurent, Shariq Iqbal, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Alex Ahern, Thomas Köppe, Kevin Millikin, Stephen Gaffney, Sophie Elster, Jackson Broshear, Chris Gamble, Kieran Milan, Robert Tung, Minjae Hwang, A. Taylan Cemgil, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Yujia Li, Amol Mandhane, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Demis Hassabis, Pushmeet Kohli, Martin A. Riedmiller, Oriol Vinyals, and David Silver. Faster sorting algorithms discovered using deep reinforcement learning. Nature , 618(7964):257–263, 2023. [32] Zohar Manna and Richard Waldinger. Synthesis: Dreams → programs. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , SE-5(4):294–328, 1979. [33] Zohar Manna and Richard Waldinger. A deductive approach to program synthesis. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems , 2(1):90–121, 1980. [34] Eric Mugnier, Emmanuel Anaya Gonzalez, Ranjit Jhala, Nadia Polikarpova, and Yuanyuan Zhou. Laurel: Unblocking automated verification with large language models. PACMPL (OOPSLA) , 2025. arXiv:2405.16792. [35] Alexander Novikov, Ngân V ˜u, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, M. Pawan Kumar, Abigail See, Swarat Chaudhuri, George Holland, Alex Davies, Sebastian Nowozin, Pushmeet Kohli, and Matej Balog. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. 2025. arXiv:2506.13131. [36] Azim Ospanov, Farzan Farnia, and Roozbeh Yousefzadeh. APOLLO: Automated LLM and Lean collabo-ration for advanced formal reasoning. 2025. arXiv:2505.05758. [37] Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Vijay Chidambaram, Ramnatthan Alagappan, Samer Al-Kiswany, Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau, and Remzi H. Arpaci-Dusseau. All file systems are not created equal: on the complexity of crafting crash-consistent applications. In Proceedings of the 11th USENIX Conference on Operating Systems Design and Implementation , OSDI’14, page 433–448, USA, 2014. USENIX Association. [38] Nadia Polikarpova, Ivan Kuraj, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Program synthesis from polymorphic refinement types. In Proceedings of the 37th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2016, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, June 13-17, 2016 , pages 522–538. ACM, 2016. 

12 [39] Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, Juyuan Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. ChatDev: Communicative agents for software development. In ACL , 2024. arXiv:2307.07924. [40] Z. Z. Ren, Zhihong Shao, Junxiao Song, Huajian Xin, Haocheng Wang, Wanjia Zhao, Liyue Zhang, Zhe Fu, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Shirong Ma, Hongxuan Tang, Yuxuan Liu, Wenjun Gao, Daya Guo, and Chong Ruan. DeepSeek-Prover-V2: Advancing formal mathematical reasoning via reinforcement learning for subgoal decomposition. 2025. arXiv:2504.21801. [41] Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog, M. Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Jordan S. Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi, Pushmeet Kohli, and Alhussein Fawzi. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models. Nature , 625(7995):468–475, 2024. [42] WANG Ruida, Rui Pan, Yuxin Li, Jipeng Zhang, Yizhen Jia, Shizhe Diao, Renjie Pi, Junjie Hu, and Tong Zhang. Ma-lot: Model-collaboration lean-based long chain-of-thought reasoning enhances formal theorem proving. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. [43] Upamanyu Sharma, Ralf Jung, Joseph Tassarotti, M. Frans Kaashoek, and Nickolai Zeldovich. Grove: a separation-logic library for verifying distributed systems. In Jason Flinn, Margo I. Seltzer, Peter Druschel, Antoine Kaufmann, and Jonathan Mace, editors, Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP 2023, Koblenz, Germany, October 23-26, 2023 , pages 113–129. ACM, 2023. [44] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS , 2023. arXiv:2303.11366. [45] Armando Solar-Lezama. Program Synthesis by Sketching . PhD thesis, UC Berkeley, 2008. [46] Armando Solar-Lezama, Liviu Tancau, Rastislav Bodík, Sanjit A. Seshia, and Vijay A. Saraswat. Combi-natorial sketching for finite programs. In John Paul Shen and Margaret Martonosi, editors, Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, ASPLOS 2006, San Jose, CA, USA, October 21-25, 2006 , pages 404–415. ACM, 2006. [47] Chuyue Sun, Ying Sheng, Oded Padon, and Clark Barrett. Clover: Closed-loop verifiable code generation. In SAIV , 2024. arXiv:2310.17807. [48] Xudong Sun, Wenjie Ma, Jiawei Tyler Gu, Zicheng Ma, Tej Chajed, Jon Howell, Andrea Lattuada, Oded Padon, Lalith Suresh, Adriana Szekeres, and Tianyin Xu. Anvil: Verifying liveness of cluster management controllers. In Ada Gavrilovska and Douglas B. Terry, editors, 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI 2024, Santa Clara, CA, USA, July 10-12, 2024 , pages 649–666. USENIX Association, 2024. [49] Amitayush Thakur, George Tsoukalas, Yeming Wen, Jimmy Xin, and Swarat Chaudhuri. An in-context learning agent for formal theorem-proving. In COLM , 2024. arXiv:2310.04353. [50] Kyle Thompson, Nuno Saavedra, Pedro Carrott, Kevin Fisher, Alex Sanchez-Stern, Yuriy Brun, João F. Ferreira, Sorin Lerner, and Emily First. Rango: Adaptive retrieval-augmented proving for automated software verification. In ICSE , 2025. arXiv:2412.14063. Introduces the CoqStoq benchmark. [51] Haiming Wang, Mert Unsal, Xiaohan Lin, Mantas Baksys, Junqi Liu, Marco Dos Santos, Flood Sung, Marina Vinyes, Zhenzhe Ying, Zekai Zhu, Jianqiao Lu, Hugues de Saxcé, Bolton Bailey, Chendong Song, Chenjun Xiao, Dehao Zhang, Ebony Zhang, Frederick Pu, Han Zhu, Jiawei Liu, Jonas Bayer, Julien Michel, Longhui Yu, Léo Dreyfus-Schmidt, Lewis Tunstall, Luigi Pagani, Moreira Machado, Pauline Bourigault, Ran Wang, Stanislas Polu, Thibaut Barroyer, Wen-Ding Li, Yazhe Niu, Yann Fleureau, Yangyang Hu, Zhouliang Yu, Zihan Wang, Zhilin Yang, Zhengying Liu, and Jia Li. Kimina-Prover preview: Towards large formal reasoning models with reinforcement learning. 2025. arXiv:2504.11354. [52] Ruida Wang, Jipeng Zhang, Yizhen Jia, Rui Pan, Shizhe Diao, Renjie Pi, and Tong Zhang. Theoremllama: Transforming general-purpose llms into lean4 experts. In 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2024 , pages 11953–11974. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2024. [53] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed H. Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. CoRR , abs/2201.11903, 2022. [54] Cheng Wen, Jialun Cao, Jie Su, Zhiwu Xu, Shengchao Qin, Mengda He, Haokun Li, Shing-Chi Cheung, and Cong Tian. Enchanting program specification synthesis by large language models using static analysis and program verification. 2024. arXiv:2404.00762. 

13 [55] James R. Wilcox, Doug Woos, Pavel Panchekha, Zachary Tatlock, Xi Wang, Michael D. Ernst, and Thomas E. Anderson. Verdi: a framework for implementing and formally verifying distributed systems. In David Grove and Stephen M. Blackburn, editors, Proceedings of the 36th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, Portland, OR, USA, June 15-17, 2015 , pages 357–368. ACM, 2015. [56] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, et al. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversations. In First conference on language modeling , 2024. [57] Chenyuan Yang, Xuheng Li, Md Rakib Hossain Misu, Jianan Yao, Weidong Cui, Yeyun Gong, Chris Hawblitzel, Shuvendu Lahiri, Jacob R. Lorch, Shuai Lu, Fan Yang, Ziqiao Zhou, and Shan Lu. AutoVerus: Automated proof generation for Rust code. In OOPSLA , 2025. arXiv:2409.13082. [58] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. In NeurIPS ,2024. arXiv:2405.15793. [59] Kaiyu Yang and Jia Deng. Learning to prove theorems via interacting with proof assistants. In ICML ,2019. arXiv:1905.09381. [60] Kaiyu Yang, Aidan M. Swope, Alex Gu, Rahul Chalamala, Peiyang Song, Shixing Yu, Saad Godil, Ryan Prenger, and Anima Anandkumar. LeanDojo: Theorem proving with retrieval-augmented language models. In NeurIPS , 2023. arXiv:2306.15626. [61] Zhe Ye, Zhengxu Yan, Jingxuan He, Timothé Kasriel, Kaiyu Yang, and Dawn Song. VERINA: Bench-marking verifiable code generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2026. arXiv:2505.23135. [62] Haoyu Zhao, Ziran Yang, Jiawei Li, Deyuan He, Zenan Li, Chi Jin, Venugopal V. Veeravalli, Aarti Gupta, and Sanjeev Arora. AlgoVeri: An aligned benchmark for verified code generation on classical algorithms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.09464 , 2026. [63] Xueliang Zhao, Lin Zheng, Haige Bo, Changran Hu, Urmish Thakker, and Lingpeng Kong. Subgoalxl: Subgoal-based expert learning for theorem proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11172 , 2024. 

14 A Specifications and the IDS Suite Dataset 

Of the seven specifications evaluated in §5, one is Chapar’s published causal-consistency spec [ 26 ]and the other six are IDS suite specs we wrote with a formal-verification and distributed-systems expert ( 1,018 lines of Rocq across five spec files; RYW+MW is the joint composition of RYW and MW with no separate spec; Table 3). Formal definitions are in App. I, which also gives two reference implementations of IDS suite CC (vector-clock and dependency-map variants) and the Lloyd-Freedman protocol (the COPS causal-consistency protocol) as a systems-scale reference. Table 3: The seven specifications. Chapar CC is a published spec; the six IDS suite specs are expert-written for this paper. Property summarises the consistency guarantee; LoC is lines of Rocq for the spec definition.                        

> Specification Family Property LoC Chapar CC Chapar cross-client causal consistency, defined over execution traces n/a Read-Your-Writes IDS suite a client reads its own most recent write 159
> Monotonic Writes IDS suite a client’s writes are observed in order 158
> Monotonic Reads IDS suite a client’s reads respect the order of observed writes 185
> RYW+MW IDS suite composition of RYW and MW (no separate spec) n/a CC IDS suite cross-client causal consistency via explicit dependency sets 248
> LCC IDS suite causal consistency parameterised by per-message labels and per-client interest masks
> 268

Common shape. Every spec is a Rocq Module Type with the same seven method signatures (getReq , getGuard , get , getRes , putReq , putGuard , put ), a State type, an Update type, and an operational semantics on client-replica configurations. IDS consumes this shape directly. 

Generality. IDS is not tuned to any individual spec: the same agent, prompts, and tools handle every spec we evaluate. Any specification matching the Module Type shape above is a candidate target for the same loop. 

## B Synthesis Results: Per-Spec Artifacts 

All seven artifacts pass Rocq’s kernel with no Admitted , Axiom , Hypothesis , or Parameter . The three CC specs (Chapar CC: 3,037 lines / 79 lemmas; IDS suite CC: 3,807 / 121 ; LCC: 3,924 / 128 )are 4–6× larger than the four session specs because their proofs span all replicas, not just sender and receiver. Table 4: Per-spec implementation choice and proof artifact size. Lemmas = Qed count; lines via wc -l .                        

> Specification Implementation Lines Lemmas Chapar CC per-key store entry with sender clock + dep vector 3,037 79 RYW per-key (val, client, ts) assoc-list 622 25 MW per-key (val, client →ts) assoc-list 722 30 MR per-(key, client) assoc-list, replace-on-write 1,063 30 RYW+MW per-key (val, client, client →ts) assoc-list 958 28 IDS suite CC vector clock + per-key VC map + balanced-tree store 3,807 121 LCC vector clock + per-key VC map + balanced-tree store + per-client label-set filter 3,924 128

Implementation rationale. Chapar CC. The 79 lemmas split: 11 per-method refinement (one per 

get /put /update /guard /init ), 11 reachable-state invariants, 7 causality preservation, 39 clock and per-key store algebra, and 11 execution-model helpers. 

Session guarantees (RYW, MW, MR, RYW+MW). All four share the same assoc-list skeleton; each parameterizes the per-entry payload to its consistency property: RYW carries (val, client, ts) to detect own writes, MW extends to (val, client →ts) to enforce writer order, MR uses one entry per 15 (key, client) updated in place, RYW+MW combines both. The proof technique is shared too: each session uses heavy case-analysis via Nat.eq_dec on key and client equality ( 80 –100 splits per spec), varying only in which payload field the splits land on. Each Get scans only the distinct keys touched, not the full Put history. MR is the hardest session spec because its Put proof splits into four sub-cases (same vs different key, same vs different client), each closed by case-analysis on Nat.eq_dec .

IDS suite CC. A vector clock, a per-key vector-clock map, and a balanced-tree store; the balanced tree keeps Get logarithmic in distinct keys rather than linear in prior Puts. Of the 121 lemmas: 8

are the step-by-step simulation, 32 are refinement-relation invariants for the state components (cell, replica, snapshot) and their preservation under updates, 19 are vector-clock algebra; the remaining 

62 are update, lookup, owner, and dependency-tracking algebra. Get’s proof closes by applying the relation that ties the implementation’s vector clocks plus per-client owner lists (per-key tracking of which client most recently wrote each entry) to the spec’s dependency sets. 

LCC. A vector clock, a per-key vector-clock map, and a balanced-tree store, with dependency entries tagged with a label (a 4-tuple of client, timestamp, key, label) and projections at Get filtered by the requesting client’s interest mask. The proof closes by step-by-step simulation; the simulation relation ties the implementation’s label-tagged vector-clock representation to the spec’s label-filtered dependency sets. Of the 128 lemmas: 6 are the step-by-step simulation, 25 are refinement-relation invariants and extensions for state components (cells, replicas, snapshots, key-snapshots), 19 are vector-clock algebra; the remaining 78 are update, lookup, owner, and dependency-tracking algebra. 

Synthesis trajectories. The artifacts above are not the first design IDS attempted. In each case, the proof stalled on a goal that resisted splitting under the spec’s natural state representation; the ISA’s reloader abandoned the branch, and the proposer pivoted to a representation under which the goal decomposed. 

Chapar CC. The hardest case in any causal-consistency proof shows that whenever a replica delivers a remote message, it has already observed every update the message transitively depends on. IDS’ first attempt kept the global state representation closest to the spec, under which the delivery lemma had to range over every in-flight message at every replica together, and the DSA could not split it. After the search stalled, the reloader abandoned that branch and the proposer revised the design to a per-key store with per-entry sender, sender-clock, and dependency vector. The proposer then split the delivery invariant into three sub-lemma classes (per-message, per-store-entry, per-replica-clock), each closing under the new representation. The representation was chosen by what split the proof, not by performance; the per-put performance win reported in §5.3 is a consequence. 

Monotonic reads. Both agent baselines, and IDS’ first attempt, stalled on the function-from-key-to-value representation. After the reloader abandoned that branch, the agent revised the design to a flat list of per-(key, client) entries updated in place, after which the put proof split into four sub-cases on key and client equality. 

IDS suite CC and LCC. The winning move is to break the simulation goal into per-message and per-store-entry sub-lemmas, each closing against the per-key store and label-tagged dependency entries respectively. The baselines try the combined goal in one shot and time out within the budget. 

## C Implementing Distributed-KV Specifications with Coding Agents (No Proof) 

Setup. We test Codex ( gpt-5.4 ) on four KV-store consistency properties (RYW, MW, MR, and CC). For each property, Codex generates 100 candidate implementations under two prompt conditions, then picks its single best candidate. That selected implementation is the agent’s output for that (property, condition). 

Setting (1) Spec-Given. Codex receives the formal Rocq specification and the module-type signature. 

Setting (2) NL-Only (“vibe coding”). Codex receives only a one-paragraph natural-language descrip-tion of the property (reproduced verbatim below) and the module-type signature. Each of the 100 generation sessions runs independently and can compile, edit, and test its own code. The selector pass is also Codex, with the same compile and test access. The selected implementation must use bounded state, cannot copy any reference implementation, and cannot use Admitted ,16 Axiom , Hypothesis , or Parameter (so the agent cannot stub out unfilled work). The agent does not write any refinement proof. We evaluate the selected implementation in two stages. Stage 1 (test). We run the implementation on an adversarial multi-client scenario; if it accepts an operation the abstract specification rejects on this scenario, Stage 1 fails. Stage 2 (proof). If Stage 1 passes, IDS attempts the refinement proof against the abstract specification. If IDS cannot close the proof within budget, Stage 2 fails. We split into two stages because proof attempts are much more expensive than scenario testing. If Stage 1 fails, Stage 2 fails too: an implementation that breaks the spec on a single trace cannot be proven correct on every trace. 

Property statements (LLM-visible in Setting 2). RYW (Read-Your-Writes). Each client must observe its own previous writes. If a client writes a value to a key and later reads that key in the same session, the read must return the client’s value or a more recent one. 

MW (Monotonic Writes). Writes by the same client are applied at every replica in the order the client issued them. 

MR (Monotonic Reads). Successive reads by the same client observe non-decreasing replica states: once a client has seen a value, later reads must not appear older. 

CC (Causal Consistency). If operation A causally precedes operation B (either A comes before B

in the same client’s session, or B reads a value written by A), every client that sees B must also have seen A.                               

> Setting (1) Spec-Given Setting (2) NL-Only Spec Stage 1 pass Stage 2 pass Cost Stage 1 pass Stage 2 pass Cost RYW 11$30.50 10$25.77 MW 10$32.10 10$27.33 MR 00$35.20 00$29.91 CC 00$47.80 00$40.79

Table 5: Outcome of best-of-N =100 implementation-only synthesis with Codex. 1 = passed, 0 =failed. Stage 1: the selected implementation runs through a fixed adversarial multi-client scenario without violating the abstract specification on that scenario. Stage 2: IDS builds a refinement proof of the implementation against the abstract specification within budget. Cost is the gpt-5.4 token cost for the 100 generations plus the selection pass. 

Result and takeaway. Best-of-N = 100 produces a verified implementation on 1 of 4 properties when given the formal specification (Setting 1, RYW), and on 0 of 4 from natural language alone (Setting 2). The two simpler session properties (RYW and MW) consistently pass the scenario test in both settings, but only RYW with the formal spec also passes the refinement proof. The harder properties (MR and CC) fail even the scenario test in both settings: the textbook patterns Codex selects (vector-clock dominance, last-write-wins) do not implement the per-key or causal-order behavior these specs demand. Two failure modes appear: (a) implementations that fail on a single adversarial trace, and (b) implementations that pass the trace but cannot be proven correct on every reachable state. IDS avoids both by integrating the refinement proof into synthesis rather than running it as a post-hoc check; in the main evaluation it closes the proof on all 7 specifications. 

## D Additional Performance Results and Throughput Breakdown 

IDS’ gains over the reference implementations all share one mechanism: IDS’ state representations bound per-op cost by the spec, while the references’ per-op cost grows with workload size. §D.1 measures this on all five IDS suite specs with cluster-runnable implementations (RYW, MR, MW, RYW+MW, IDS suite CC), shows Chapar CC at the top of the figure for comparison, and adds an illustrative LCC row (labeled causal consistency: each client subscribes to a set of topic labels and only sees causality enforced on those). Across the IDS suite, throughput tracks consistency strength (RYW > MW > RYW+MW > MR > LCC > IDS suite CC at put = 50% ) because stricter specs 17 require more checking work per operation. Chapar CC and IDS suite CC are both causal-consistency variants but their reference implementations are designed differently (Chapar’s reads one position out of a flat list of per-write dependencies, while IDS suite’s compares an entire per-client clock vector and atomically updates the writer’s slot on every Put), so the two CC rows show different per-op work at the same correctness level. §§D.2 and D.3 decompose the gap on Chapar CC and Monotonic Reads. 

Setup details (extending §5.1). Cluster zone: us-central1-f . Each VM is an e2-standard-2 

(2 vCPU, 8 GB RAM) on Debian 12. Toolchain: OCaml 4.13.1 (dune 3.10) and Rocq 8.18.0. Throughput is the sum across the NW = 4 workers of N/t w, where tw is each worker’s wall-clock time and N is its ops count, taking the median over three runs per cell; the put-rate sweep uses N =1000 (4,000 cluster ops total per run) and the scaling sweep varies N ∈ { 1,000 , 2,000 , 5,000 , 20 ,000 }.Per-operation latency is bracketed inside the runtime around put_method /get_method and merged across workers; p99 is the 99th percentile of the pooled per-op latency distribution. Peak memory is the worker maximum of Maximum resident set size from /usr/bin/time -v , taking the median over three runs. Workload parameters: key_range = 50 , val_range = 100 ,000 , fixed seed 42 . The cluster uses a Chapar-style UDP runtime ( runtime_doctex.ml ) adapted to the seven-method doctex AlgDef interface; we patched a socket bug for OCaml 4.13 / Debian 12. 

D.1 Per-protocol curves: all five IDS suite specs Result. Read-then-write specs cause the reference to exceed our 180 s wall-clock cap at every put rate measured: in Fig. 9 the reference’s MW and RYW+MW rows show red × at every cell, with no measurable throughput. IDS runs cleanly throughout: 152 kops/s on MW and 139 kops/s on RYW+MW at put = 60% . The mechanism is a closure chain: the reference stores per-replica state as a function from key to value (a function-as-map); after extraction to OCaml, each prior Put 

adds a nested closure that a Get must unwrap. The read-then-write check re-evaluates this chain on every Put ; combined with UDP packet reordering and the protocol’s no-retry compare-and-swap, throughput collapses to zero. RYW has no read-then-write check, so its reference is competitive with IDS across the put-rate sweep: within roughly 20% in either direction depending on workload mix, with IDS winning at low put rate (pct = 20 ) and the reference faster at high put rate (pct = 60 –70 ). The reversal is a per-Put cost trade: IDS’ assoc-list rewrites its spine on every Put (O(K) cell allocations, 

K = unique keys touched), while the reference’s function-as-map prepends a single closure layer per Put (O(1) heap cell). At low put rate the assoc-list’s O(K) Get lookup beats the reference’s closure-chain walk; at high put rate the per-Put allocation cost dominates. MR shows the same chain-walk cost on Get (per-layer slope quantified in §D.3); IDS suite CC follows the same mechanism with IDS’ balanced-tree store keeping Get logarithmic in distinct keys. Memory: IDS’ assoc-list pays 0.1–1.0 MB more on RYW (per-entry overhead) and runs in the same 5–6 MB envelope as the reference on the other specs where the reference completes; on MW and RYW+MW the reference produces no memory measurement (it never completes a run). All memory traces are at N = 1 ,000 

ops/worker; IDS suite CC’s vector-clock state is O(#clients ), so its trace is flat across the put-rate sweep at this workload size. At substantially larger N or more clients, the message-bus and per-cell deps would push memory upward. The rightmost column (throughput vs N at put = 50% ) confirms the mechanism on every spec: the reference’s throughput drops as N grows because each new Put 

extends the chain, while IDS’ assoc-list and balanced-tree structures keep throughput approximately flat. Across the put-rate sweep, both implementations’ throughput falls and p99 latency rises as put-rate increases because each Put is broadcast to every replica, so more writes mean more in-flight messages and longer per-op queue waits. 

Course correction on MW. Without performance feedback, IDS ships the first verifying design: a balanced-tree store. With performance feedback, the agent runs both candidates in its microbench harness and converges on the assoc-list, which the cluster benchmark harness confirms at 152 k ops/s at put = 60% (Fig. 9). Performance feedback changes the search policy, not the correctness criterion; both candidates are verified IDS suite refinements. 

D.2 Throughput breakdown: Chapar CC Setup. We attribute each algorithm’s per-op time to four pieces: its Get cost (varies by algorithm), a shared Put baseline (per-key entries: 58 .4 μs, the smallest of the three), a wire-bytes term proportional 18 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 

Put %  

> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> 125
> Time per worker op  [μs]
> 104.8K
> 62.8K
> 55.5K
> 48.2K
> 37.5K 38.3K

vector-clock baseline      

> 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70%

Put %  

> 88.9K
> 62.5K 60.9K
> 54.5K
> 49.1K
> 33.6K

list-based baseline      

> 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70%

Put %      

> 265.1K 186.9K 147.4K 124.6K 109.2K 94.7K

IDS (per-key entries)    

> Get cost Put baseline extra bytes residual

Figure 7: Per-component decomposition of Chapar’s two published baselines (vector-clock, list-based) and IDS’ Chapar implementation (per-key store entries, used here as internal pivot). Bar height equals 4/(published cluster throughput) in μs per worker op. Each bar splits into local Get cost, the per-key-entries Put baseline (same for all), per-algorithm extra wire bytes, and a per-algorithm residual γ. Segments sum to the published value at every cell by construction. 0 50 100 150 200            

> # Puts seen before this Get
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> Median Get latency [  s]
> put% = 20
> 0100 200 300 400 500
> # Puts seen before this Get
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40 put% = 50
> 0200 400 600
> # Puts seen before this Get
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> put% = 70
> IDS suite reference (function-as-map) IDS (assoc-list) balanced-tree alternative

Figure 8: Get latency vs. closure depth (number of Put s preceding each Get in the same worker trace) for the three Monotonic Reads implementations at three put rates. The IDS suite reference’s 

Get latency grows linearly with depth (slope 0.21 μs per closure layer at put = 20% , R2 = 0 .95 ). IDS’ assoc-list slope is an order of magnitude smaller; the balanced-tree variant’s slope is within statistical noise at every put rate. to extra bytes per Put ( β = 18 μs per byte, fit from vector-clock vs per-key entries), and a CPU residual γ that captures whatever the wire-bytes term does not explain. Marshaled bytes per Put on the cluster: 44 .81 (vector-clock), 41 .05 (list-based), 39 .62 (per-key entries). 

Result. Vector-clock loses on wire bytes; list-based loses on CPU. Vector-clock ships +5 .2 bytes per Put over per-key entries, mapping to +47 μs of per-op work at put = 50% ; the residual γ is 

−1.75 μs, well below the bytes term. Almost the entire gap is wire bytes. List-based ships only 

+1 .4 extra bytes per Put on average, yet γ = +21 .6 μs at put = 50% . The list-based replica stores the full history of delivered messages; receivers walk this list on every delivery (causality check), and Get walks it again to find the most-recent value for the requested key. Vector-clock and per-key entries do constant-time element-wise lookups. 

D.3 Throughput breakdown: Monotonic Reads Setup. Three MR implementations on the same runtime and identical wire format ( 92 .83 B per 

Put on average): the IDS suite reference (function-as-map), IDS (assoc-list), and a balanced-tree alternative. Throughput differences are CPU-side. The balanced tree is a control: it tests whether IDS’ win comes from the assoc-list specifically or from any structure that does not walk a closure chain on Get .

Where the cost lands. The reference pays on Get ; the refinements pay on Put . At put = 50% :19 implementation Tget (μs) Tput (μs) IDS suite reference (function-as-map) 24 .83 15 .40 

IDS (assoc-list) 10 .81 16 .81 

balanced-tree alternative 11 .40 21 .12 

Regressing Get latency against closure depth (number of Put s preceding a Get in the same worker trace) confirms the reference’s chain walk: slope 0.21 μs/layer at put = 20% (R2 = 0 .95 , Fig. 8). Both refinements stay flat across every put rate measured ( |slope | < 0.025 μs/layer): bounded data structure, no chain to walk. The balanced tree’s extra Put cost comes from rebalance. 

N-scaling at put = 50% . The reference’s throughput drops as ops-per-worker N grows; IDS stays nearly flat: 

N 1,000 2,000 5,000 20 ,000 

IDS suite reference (function-as-map) 108 ,000 100 ,000 90 ,000 80 ,000 

IDS (assoc-list) 130 ,000 124 ,000 117 ,000 112 ,000 

At N = 1 ,000 IDS is 1.20 × faster; at N = 20 ,000 the gap widens to 1.40 ×. Throughput drop from 

N = 1 ,000 to N = 20 ,000 : reference 1.35 ×, IDS 1.16 ×. The reference’s per-Get closure walk grows linearly with prior Put s, so its per-op cost rises with N ; the assoc-list’s lookup is bounded by the number of distinct keys in the workload (50 here), so its per-op cost is N -independent and only message-bus pressure causes the mild decline. 20 Table 6: What each cross-language benchmark gives the model and what the model must produce. ✓

= given as input; ✗ = the model must generate it. “Spec” covers preconditions and postconditions (or the theorem statement, where applicable). For DafnyBench the implementation body is given; only Dafny verification hints (loop invariants, assertions, decreases clauses) are stripped. miniCodeProps and CoqStoq give the spec as a Lean / Coq theorem statement.                                                  

> Benchmark Language Verifier Given to model Task NL desc. Signature Spec Code DafnyBench [30] Dafny Dafny ✗✓✓✓annotations miniCodeProps [29] Lean 4 Lean ✗✓✓✓proof Verus-Bench [57] Rust Verus ✗✓✓✓annotations CoqStoq [50] Coq Coq ✗✓✓✓proof CloverBench [47] Dafny Dafny ✓✓✓✗code + annot. VERINA [61] Lean 4 Lean ✓✓✓✗code + proof

Table 7: Pass counts on verification benchmarks. Bold = best per column. The first four are proof-only (impl and spec given); on these, IDS reduces to its DSA component since the ISA has no design space to search. The last three are concurrent code-and-proof tasks. Per-benchmark slices, prior-SOTA references, and CloverBench note in App. E.                                     

> Method DafnyBench miniCodeProps Verus-Bench CoqStoq VERINA AlgoVeri CloverBench Prior SOTA 52 / 100 49 / 100 137 / 150 28 / 100 38 / 189 31 / 77 –Codex 78 / 100 80 / 100 148 / 150 46 / 100 136 / 189 51 / 77 62 / 62 Claude Code 76 / 100 86 / 100 148 / 150 51 / 100 149 / 189 56 / 77 62 / 62
> IDS (ours) 88 / 100 100 / 100 149 / 150 97 / 100 176 / 189 65 / 77 62 / 62

## E Results on Proof, Annotation, and Code-and-Proof Benchmarks 

IDS beats every prior method on the four proof and annotation benchmarks, and reaches 176 /189 

on VERINA against prior SOTA 38 and agentic baselines Codex 136 , Claude Code 149 (Table 7). 

E.1 Proof and annotation benchmarks Setup. The model receives a complete task specification (signature, preconditions, postconditions, and code where applicable) and must produce verifier-acceptable output: proof annotations on Dafny-Bench [ 30 ] and Verus-Bench [ 57 ], or a complete proof on miniCodeProps [ 29 ] and CoqStoq [ 50 ](modality in Table 6). For each benchmark we use the slice the prior SOTA method published its number on: • DafnyBench : 100 hardest tasks; prior SOTA is DafnyPro [ 6] (from the DafnyBench paper). • miniCodeProps : 100 tasks from the sorting split; prior SOTA is COPRA [49]. • Verus-Bench : full 150 tasks; prior SOTA is AutoVerus [57]. • CoqStoq : 100 hardest tasks; prior SOTA is Rango [50]. 

Result. IDS reaches 88 /100 on DafnyBench, 100 /100 on miniCodeProps, 149 /150 on Verus-Bench, and 97 /100 on CoqStoq (Table 7), beating the strongest prior on all four. The largest absolute gap is on CoqStoq ( +69 over Rango); IDS hits a perfect 100 /100 on miniCodeProps, and on Verus-Bench all three LLM methods are within 1% of saturation (IDS 149 , Codex 148 , Claude Code 148 of 

150 ). Failures reflect per-task budget caps and proofs requiring tactics or library-specific lemmas the agent did not discover within budget (§F.1). 

E.2 Code-and-proof benchmarks Setup. A second, recent line of benchmarks evaluates joint code-and-proof synthesis on single-function algorithmic tasks (sorting, search, list manipulation, basic arithmetic like factorial/gcd/Fi-21 bonacci): the model receives a natural-language description, signature, and spec, and produces both the code and a proof of correctness. These tasks are strictly simpler than the distributed-system specs of §5.2: no concurrency, no replication, no multi-step operational semantics. • VERINA [ 61 ]: 189 Lean tasks; prior SOTA is iterative refinement with Lean compiler feedback ( 64 rounds), reported in the VERINA paper. • AlgoVeri [62 ]: 77 problems, each expressed in Dafny, Verus, and Lean; prior SOTA 31 /77 

(Gemini-3 Flash, Dafny track, reported in the AlgoVeri paper). • CloverBench [47 ]: 62 Dafny tasks. We omit a Prior-SOTA cell because Clover (the only prior published method) evaluates a different task: its consistency-checker filters pre-existing correct triples (an 87% acceptance rate, with 13% false negatives where it rejects a known-correct triple). Our column reports end-to-end synthesis: given the spec, the model generates code and annotations, and the Dafny verifier accepts. 

Result. IDS reaches 176 /189 on VERINA, well above prior SOTA 38 and agentic baselines Codex 

136 , Claude Code 149 ; 65 /77 on AlgoVeri’s Dafny track, 2× the published Gemini-3 Flash baseline of 31 /77 ; and all three LLM methods saturate at 62 /62 on CloverBench. 

## F IDS Architecture Details 

This appendix expands on the components introduced in §4 and ablated in §5.4. The architecture instantiates the two-level CEGIS-style refinement of §4. The inner loop is the DSA (§F.2): forward moves Define , Prove , Decompose extend the partial (code, proof) candidate, and the structured Rocq diagnostic from a failed step (§F.6) is a concrete witness that the candidate cannot close as written, used by the agent to choose Repair or Revert . The outer loop is the ISA: a DSA’s stalled proof attempts and bench failures (§F.7) drive the proposer (§F.4) on tactical stalls and the reloader (§F.5) on strategic dead-ends. The audit step (§F.3) is orthogonal to refinement: it is a deterministic safety gate, not a counterexample signal. 

F.1 Proof methodology 

Each spec is a Rocq Module Type carrying a State type, an Update type, seven method signatures (getReq , getGuard , get , getRes , putReq , putGuard , put ), and an operational semantics on client–replica configurations. The implementation IDS produces is an AlgDef module providing the same seven methods at concrete state types, plus a Refinement module proving forward simulation: every step the implementation can take corresponds to a step the abstract spec can take, on related states. From the Refinement we obtain a TraceInclusion theorem: every observable trace of the implementation is also a trace of the abstract spec. The tactic vocabulary is standard Rocq: inversion , destruct , subst , rewrite , apply ,

econstructor; eauto , simpl , lia , congruence , with case-analysis on Nat.eq_dec for equality decisions on identifiers and timestamps. No firstorder /intuition shortcuts; no Admitted , no 

Axiom , no Hypothesis , no Parameter . Closure is verified by Rocq’s kernel. 

F.2 DSA: deductive synthesis 

The DSA is a Codex (or Claude Code) session per workspace performing the deductive-synthesis loop of §4. At each search-tree node the agent moves forward with one of three primitives: • Define : declare or extend a state/message type or function body, with admit placeholders for parts not yet filled in (e.g. adding a Cell record to the per-key store with cell_deps stubbed). • Prove : close an open proof obligation by replacing Admitted with a tactic sequence ending in 

Qed , or extend an existing tactic block. • Decompose : state a helper lemma as Admitted and use it to advance the proof of an existing lemma; the helper is discharged in a later iteration. After each forward step make runs and Rocq’s type-checker is the only oracle. On error, the agent backtracks with one of two primitives: 22 • Repair : re-attempt the failed step with a different tactic (e.g. induction instead of destruct ;

lia instead of omega ). • Revert : rewind to an earlier search-tree node and choose a different forward primitive (typically when the same compile error recurs three or more times). The agent’s initial brief is read from CLAUDE.md in the workspace and instantiates the four briefings of §4 (methodology, auditability, design, tactical playbook). The brief shown below is for the Rocq setting (our IDS suite specs and Chapar CC, plus CoqStoq and miniCodeProps); for cross-language benchmarks we swap the verifier and surface tools to match the target language: Dafny (DafnyBench, AlgoVeri-Dafny, CloverBench), Verus (Verus-Bench), and Lean 4 (VERINA), with success criterion adapted accordingly (e.g. dafny verify accepts, lake build succeeds, verus reports zero errors). 

Role: Deductive Synthesis Agent. Given a specification, incrementally produce an implementation and a machine-checked proof that it satisfies the specification. The type-checker is the only oracle and accepts a partial state (with deferred holes) as a valid intermediate. 

Schema. Synthesis is a finite sequence of well-typed steps; the file must type-check (possibly with deferred holes) after every step. Take one forward move: • Define (refinement): introduce or extend a Definition , Record , Inductive , Fixpoint , or Module ;bodies may contain admit or invoke Admitted lemmas. • Prove (closure): replace an Admitted lemma with a tactic sequence ending in Qed , or extend an existing partial proof. • Decompose (lemma introduction): state a helper lemma as Admitted , use it to advance the current proof, and discharge it later. This is the deferred-hole device of deductive synthesis. On error, backtrack: Repair (different tactic on the same goal, e.g. induction instead of destruct , lia 

instead of omega ) or Revert (rewind to an earlier state and try a different forward move; trigger when the same error recurs three or more times). 

Invariants. (I1) The file type-checks after every step. (I2) Every Admitted is a deferred hole, not a permanent assumption: all Admitted must be closed before reporting done . (I3) The specification is fixed. (I4) No Axiom , Hypothesis , Parameter , or unguarded recursion. 

Design. State types should be concrete (records, bounded lists, indexed nats), not function types whose 

override builds closure chains under repeated update. State must not grow unboundedly with the number of operations: traces, logs, and accumulated dependency lists belong in the proof context, not the runtime state. 

Termination. Report done when (a) the file type-checks with zero Admitted and zero admit , and (b) the audit step passes (no vacuous proofs; no specification edits; non-trivial method bodies). The coordinator additionally extracts the implementation and runs the benchmark harness; if extraction or execution fails, the run reverts. 

Tactical playbook. 

• Build simple to complex: prove small structural facts first, then combine. • When stuck on a subgoal, read it carefully; the goal often names the missing helper. • Use admit (lowercase) to skip subgoals temporarily; the final file must have zero Admitted and zero 

admit .

App. G walks through an end-to-end illustration of this schema on a small target ( all_less_than ): each of the five synthesis steps is annotated with its move ( Define , Prove , Decompose ), with every intermediate listing type-checking under the kernel. 

F.3 Audit step 

The audit step is a deterministic Python script that gates closure with kernel-level verdicts (no model outputs). It encapsulates the cheating patterns we have observed during runs. 

Static checks. 

• Admitted count is zero. • After stripping comments, Axiom , Hypothesis , and Parameter counts are zero. • make clean && make exits zero. 

Vacuous-proof patterns. The script also matches the closed file against four patterns: • A put that returns a fixed constant the spec accepts on every input. 23 • An always-true getGuard that admits any read. • A forward-simulation theorem stated over an empty domain so that it holds vacuously. • A state-only stub whose Update drops the payload and returns the initial state on every operation. A candidate that fails any check is sent to the ISA; only candidates passing all checks count as audit-clean closures. 

F.4 Proposer (ISA tactical role) 

After the coordinator counts no progress across 10 consecutive polls, the proposer fires as a one-shot LLM session. It receives the work file, every Admitted lemma’s surrounding 17 -line context, and the most recent make error with 4 lines of trailing context when present, and writes its output to 

GUIDANCE.md in the workspace. 

Role. You are an expert Rocq proof advisor. Read the work file and focus on the proof goals and error context below. Do NOT edit the .v file. 

For each Admitted proof, follow this checklist: 

1. Read the lemma statement. What does it claim? What are the hypotheses? What is the conclusion type? 2. Identify the proof structure needed: forall x, P x → intros x ; inductive type (list, trace, nat) 

→ induction on it; step/transition → destruct on the step type, then case analysis; simulation →

invariant + induction on trace length; two functions equal → functional_extensionality .3. Identify missing helper lemmas. For each subgoal you cannot close directly, state the EXACT helper (name, signature, informal meaning). Suggest: prove it separately; Admit it in the main proof; close it. 4. If the proof is > 30 lines, decompose: by cases ( X_case_C1 , X_case_C2 , . . . for each constructor); by subgoal (if A ∧ B, prove A and B separately); extract common patterns repeating 3+ times. 5. Suggest specific tactic sequences, not vague directions. 

For compile errors, diagnose using a decision tree (e.g., “Cannot unify X with Y” → type mismatch, use 

Check expr. ; “Tactic failure” → try lia instead of omega ; “No matching clauses” → incomplete pattern match). 

Output. Write GUIDANCE.md with one section per Admitted proof or error: (a) the diagnosis, (b) the exact tactic sequence to try, (c) any helper-lemma signatures. 

On Chapar, the proposer chose three sub-lemma classes (per-message, per-store-entry, per-replica-clock) by recognising that the global delivery invariant decomposes cleanly along these axes, none of which Rocq’s automation closes alone. 

F.5 Reloader (ISA strategic role) 

The reloader escalates every 20 polling cycles when no progress is detected: Level 1 at stall cycle 20 ,Level 2 at 40 , Level 3 at 60 , and so on. Each level is a one-shot LLM session reading DESIGN_LOG.md ,

STATUS.md , and every prior level’s output, and writes META_GUIDANCE_L{N}.md . The strategist consumes the output to rewrite its plan and spawn a fresh worker on the new design. 

Role. You are a level-N formal verification architect. Read DESIGN_LOG.md , STATUS.md , and every prior 

META_GUIDANCE_L{1..N-1}.md : the history of all approaches tried and why each failed. 

Synthesize a NEW approach that avoids ALL recorded failures. Think across these dimensions: 1. Data representation. Concrete types for state and messages: records, bounded lists, nats, not functions. 2. Abstraction function. How concrete state maps to abstract state. This is the KEY creative choice; if previous attempts failed on the simulation proof, the abstraction was wrong. 3. Invariant. What property holds at every reachable state. The invariant must be (a) true initially, (b) preserved by every step, (c) strong enough to prove the final theorem. 4. Proof decomposition. Which helper lemmas are needed, stated explicitly with signatures. 5. Minimum information. For each function that takes a collection, could the caller pass a smaller collection and still get a correct result? The most precise design passes only what is needed per call. 

Output. Write META_GUIDANCE_L{N}.md as a CONCRETE blueprint a worker can directly implement: exact Record types, method signatures, abstraction function, invariant, and lemma decomposition. Do NOT write vague advice; do NOT spawn workers. 

24 On Chapar, the reloader chose a per-key store entry recording sender, sender clock, and dependency vector; alternative layouts (e.g. a single global per-replica state) leave the delivery lemma unprovable from local information. 

F.6 Rocq feedback 

Each make invocation captures stdout/stderr; on non-zero exit, the coordinator extracts every Error: 

line plus 2 lines of preceding context and 4 lines of trailing context as a single error block. The block is included verbatim in the worker’s next prompt alongside the proof goal, the local hypothesis context, and the tactic backtrace where applicable. No normalisation or summarisation is applied: the structured Rocq diagnostic carries the localisation signal. Replacing this stream with a binary accept/reject collapses the search (§5.4 reports ≤ 1/3 closure on every Rocq spec under −VF). 

F.7 Performance feedback 

When a worker reaches a verifier-clean state with a design hash distinct from prior runs, the coordi-nator invokes the benchmark harness asynchronously. The harness extracts the implementation to OCaml, deploys it on the cluster (App. D), and writes results to PERF_RESULTS.md in the workspace. Throughput targets are calibrated per-spec from the published reference; implementations whose throughput falls below the target are flagged and trigger the reloader on the next escalation. 

## G Synthesis Progression: all_less_than 

This appendix walks through one full progression of IDS’ deductive-synthesis loop on a small target. Step 0 and the Final State are complete Rocq files that compile; the listings for intermediate Steps 1–5 show only the parts that change from the previous step, with not-yet-filled bodies stubbed as Parameter . The progression on real distributed-system specs follows the same pattern at much larger scale (§5.2); the small target keeps each listing short enough to read end-to-end. The five synthesis steps below are an instance of the deductive-synthesis schema of §F.2. Step 1 is a 

Decompose (split the goal into a nil and a cons helper lemma). Step 2 combines Define (fill the nil 

body) with Prove (close the nil helper). Step 3 is another Decompose (split the cons helper on the head). Step 4 is Define (the recursive call). Step 5 combines Define (fill the else branch) with Prove 

(close the else helper). The file type-checks at every step (Invariant I1); Admitted placeholders carry the deferred holes forward and are all discharged by the Final state. The target is all_less_than : list nat -> nat -> bool , returning true iff every element of the input list is strictly less than the bound n. The correctness statement is the iff-equivalence with 

Forall :

all_less_than l n = true ⇔ Forall (fun x => x < n) l .

G.1 Step 0: bare specification 

The implementation is a Parameter ; the correctness lemma is Admitted . The file type-checks but proves nothing.       

> 1Require Import Coq.Lists.List.
> 23Parameter all_less_than : list nat -> nat -> bool.
> 45Lemma all_less_than_correct : forall (l : list nat) (n : nat),
> 6all_less_than l n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) l.
> 7Proof.
> 8Admitted.

Listing 1: Step 0: spec only. 25 G.2 Step 1: case-split on the input list 

The agent commits to recursing on l. The implementation becomes a Definition with a match 

on nil /cons ; the branch bodies are stubbed as Parameter s. The correctness lemma is split into a 

_nil helper and a _cons helper, both Admitted ; the main lemma now closes by induction on l,applying each helper at its leaf.  

> 1

Parameter nil_body : bool.  

> 2

Parameter cons_body : nat -> list nat -> bool.  

> 34

Definition all_less_than (l : list nat) (n : nat) : bool :=  

> 5

match l with  

> 6

| nil => nil_body  

> 7

| x :: xs => cons_body x xs  

> 8

end.  

> 910

Lemma all_less_than_correct_nil : forall (n : nat),  

> 11

all_less_than nil n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) nil.  

> 12

Proof. Admitted.  

> 13 14

Lemma all_less_than_correct_cons :  

> 15

forall (x : nat) (xs : list nat) (n : nat),  

> 16

all_less_than (x :: xs) n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) (x :: xs).  

> 17

Proof. Admitted.  

> 18 19

Lemma all_less_than_correct : forall (l : list nat) (n : nat),  

> 20

all_less_than l n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) l.  

> 21

Proof.  

> 22

intros l n. induction l as [| x xs IH].  

> 23

- apply all_less_than_correct_nil.  

> 24

- apply all_less_than_correct_cons.  

> 25

Qed. 

G.3 Step 2: fill the nil branch and close the nil helper 

The agent fills nil_body with true (replacing the Parameter ) and proves _nil : both sides of the iff are vacuously satisfied ( true = true ; Forall _ nil holds by the empty constructor). The 

cons body is still a Parameter . 

> 1

Definition all_less_than (l : list nat) (n : nat) : bool :=  

> 2

match l with  

> 3

| nil => true  

> 4

| x :: xs => cons_body x xs  

> 5

end.  

> 67

Lemma all_less_than_correct_nil : forall (n : nat),  

> 8

all_less_than nil n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) nil.  

> 9

Proof. intros. simpl. split; intros; constructor. Qed. 

G.4 Step 3: introduce the if branch and split the cons helper 

The agent commits to comparing x against n via x <? n, leaving both branches as Parameter 

stubs. The _cons helper is split into a _then sub-helper (under x < n ) and an _else sub-helper (under ¬(x < n) ), and _cons now proves itself by case-splitting on Nat.ltb_spec and applying the appropriate sub-helper.  

> 1

Parameter then_body else_body : nat -> list nat -> nat -> bool.  

> 23

Definition all_less_than (l : list nat) (n : nat) : bool :=  

> 4

match l with  

> 5

| nil => true  

> 6

| x :: xs => if x <? n then then_body x xs n else else_body x xs n 

26 7 end.  

> 89

Lemma all_less_than_correct_cons_then :  

> 10

forall (x : nat) (xs : list nat) (n : nat),  

> 11

x < n -> (all_less_than xs n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) xs) ->  

> 12

(all_less_than (x :: xs) n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) (x :: xs)).  

> 13

Proof. Admitted.  

> 14 15

Lemma all_less_than_correct_cons_else :  

> 16

forall (x : nat) (xs : list nat) (n : nat),  

> 17

~ (x < n) -> (all_less_than xs n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) xs) ->  

> 18

(all_less_than (x :: xs) n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) (x :: xs)).  

> 19

Proof. Admitted.  

> 20 21

Lemma all_less_than_correct_cons :  

> 22

forall (x : nat) (xs : list nat) (n : nat),  

> 23

all_less_than xs n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) xs ->  

> 24

all_less_than (x :: xs) n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) (x :: xs).  

> 25

Proof.  

> 26

intros. destruct (Nat.ltb_spec x n) as [Hlt | Hge].  

> 27

- apply all_less_than_correct_cons_then; assumption.  

> 28

- apply all_less_than_correct_cons_else; [apply Nat.le_ngt; assumption | assumption].  

> 29

Qed. 

G.5 Step 4: fill the then branch with the recursive call 

The agent fills then_body with all_less_than xs n : the implementation now actually recurses, so Definition is promoted to Fixpoint . The _then helper proves cleanly: under x < n , applying 

Nat.ltb_lt rewrites the if -condition to true , and Forall on x :: xs reduces to x < n on the head plus Forall on xs , both available.  

> 1

Fixpoint all_less_than (l : list nat) (n : nat) : bool :=  

> 2

match l with  

> 3

| nil => true  

> 4

| x :: xs => if x <? n then all_less_than xs n else else_body x xs n  

> 5

end.  

> 67

Lemma all_less_than_correct_cons_then :  

> 8

forall (x : nat) (xs : list nat) (n : nat),  

> 9

x < n -> (all_less_than xs n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) xs) ->  

> 10

(all_less_than (x :: xs) n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) (x :: xs)).  

> 11

Proof.  

> 12

intros x xs n Hlt H_ind. simpl.  

> 13

apply Nat.ltb_lt in Hlt. rewrite Hlt.  

> 14

split; intros.  

> 15

- constructor; [apply Nat.ltb_lt; assumption | tauto].  

> 16

- inversion H. tauto.  

> 17

Qed. 

G.6 Step 5: fill the else branch and close the else helper 

The agent’s first attempt is to recurse: else_body := all_less_than xs n (“skip the out-of-bound element, keep checking”). The implementation type-checks, but the _else obligation does not: under ¬(x < n ) the goal becomes all_less_than xs n = true ⇔ Forall (fun y => y < n) (x :: xs) , which fails on xs = nil , x = 5 , n = 3 (LHS is true ; RHS demands 5 < 3 ). Rocq rejects the proof. The agent backtracks and replaces the else body with false : the function now returns false on any out-of-bound element, the _else helper closes (LHS becomes false = true , closed by discriminate ; RHS gives x < n from inversion of Forall , contradicting 

¬(x < n )).  

> 1

(* Attempt 1: else_body := all_less_than xs n (rejected: iff fails) *) 

27 2 (* Attempt 2: else_body := false (accepted) *)  

> 34

Lemma all_less_than_correct_cons_else :  

> 5

forall (x : nat) (xs : list nat) (n : nat),  

> 6

~ (x < n) -> (all_less_than xs n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) xs) ->  

> 7

(all_less_than (x :: xs) n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) (x :: xs)).  

> 8

Proof.  

> 9

intros x xs n Hge _. simpl.  

> 10

apply Nat.le_ngt in Hge. apply Nat.ltb_ge in Hge. rewrite Hge.  

> 11

split.  

> 12

- discriminate.  

> 13

- intros HF. inversion HF; subst.  

> 14

apply Nat.ltb_lt in H1. congruence.  

> 15

Qed. 

G.7 Final state 

After five steps every Parameter stub and Admitted placeholder is closed. Rocq’s kernel accepts the file, verifying all_less_than_correct on every input.  

> 1

Require Import Coq.Lists.List.  

> 2

Require Import Coq.Arith.PeanoNat.  

> 34

Fixpoint all_less_than (l : list nat) (n : nat) : bool :=  

> 5

match l with  

> 6

| nil => true  

> 7

| x :: xs => if x <? n then all_less_than xs n else false  

> 8

end.  

> 910

Lemma all_less_than_correct_nil : forall (n : nat),  

> 11

all_less_than nil n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) nil.  

> 12

Proof. intros. simpl. split; intros; constructor. Qed.  

> 13 14

Lemma all_less_than_correct_cons_then :  

> 15

forall (x : nat) (xs : list nat) (n : nat),  

> 16

x < n -> (all_less_than xs n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) xs) ->  

> 17

(all_less_than (x :: xs) n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) (x :: xs)).  

> 18

Proof.  

> 19

intros x xs n Hlt H_ind. simpl.  

> 20

apply Nat.ltb_lt in Hlt. rewrite Hlt.  

> 21

split; intros.  

> 22

- constructor; [apply Nat.ltb_lt; assumption | tauto].  

> 23

- inversion H. tauto.  

> 24

Qed.  

> 25 26

Lemma all_less_than_correct_cons_else :  

> 27

forall (x : nat) (xs : list nat) (n : nat),  

> 28

~ (x < n) -> (all_less_than xs n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) xs) ->  

> 29

(all_less_than (x :: xs) n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) (x :: xs)).  

> 30

Proof.  

> 31

intros x xs n Hge _. simpl.  

> 32

apply Nat.le_ngt in Hge. apply Nat.ltb_ge in Hge. rewrite Hge.  

> 33

split.  

> 34

- discriminate.  

> 35

- intros HF. inversion HF; subst.  

> 36

apply Nat.ltb_lt in H1. congruence.  

> 37

Qed.  

> 38 39

Lemma all_less_than_correct_cons :  

> 40

forall (x : nat) (xs : list nat) (n : nat),  

> 41

all_less_than xs n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) xs ->  

> 42

all_less_than (x :: xs) n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) (x :: xs).  

> 43

Proof.  

> 44

intros. destruct (Nat.ltb_spec x n) as [Hlt | Hge]. 

28 45 - apply all_less_than_correct_cons_then; assumption.          

> 46 - apply all_less_than_correct_cons_else; [apply Nat.le_ngt; assumption | assumption].
> 47 Qed.
> 48 49 Lemma all_less_than_correct : forall (l : list nat) (n : nat),
> 50 all_less_than l n = true <-> Forall (fun x => x < n) l.
> 51 Proof.
> 52 intros l n. induction l as [| x xs IH].
> 53 - apply all_less_than_correct_nil.
> 54 - apply all_less_than_correct_cons. assumption.
> 55 Qed.

Listing 2: Step 5 (final): implementation and proof, fully verified. The progression on real distributed-system specs follows the same pattern at much larger scale: dozens of helper lemmas, hundreds of lines of implementation, and tactics that range over inductive simulation arguments rather than single-step rewrites. §4 describes how IDS drives this process; the case-study trajectory in §5 shows it on the causal-consistency specification. 

## H Limitations, Broader Impacts, and Ethics 

The main paper presents IDS’ design and evaluation; this appendix addresses the limitations of the work, the broader impacts of verified-synthesis tooling, and ethical considerations. 

Limitations. IDS requires a formal Rocq Module Type as input; we do not synthesize specifica-tions from natural language. Compute cost is 2–11 hours and $52–$155 per closed spec, substantially below the months-to-years of expert proof effort it replaces but still meaningful. We evaluate on distributed key-value-store consistency; generality to other verified-synthesis domains (compilers, OS kernels, cryptographic protocols) is conjectured, not measured. 

Broader impacts. Distributed systems are common in production software (databases, message queues, cloud services), but formal verification of these systems has remained out of reach for most production code because hand-written proofs take person-years of expert effort. IDS reduces that effort to hours of compute, putting verified distributed software within reach of production teams. Kernel-checked proofs make IDS’ outputs safer than unverified LLM-generated code: the verifier rules out silent bugs against the specification. As with all formal verification, mis-specification remains a residual risk. 

Ethics. The work involves no human subjects and no scraped data; the verified outputs introduce no dual-use risks beyond those already present in unverified LLM code generation. 29 20 30 40 50 60 70 

> 100
> 200
> Chapar CC

throughput (kops/s)      

> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 40
> 60

p99 latency ( μs)      

> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 0
> 20

memory peak (MB)    

> 1K 2K 5K 20K
> 50
> 100

throughput (kops/s) 

vs N at pct=50                                                                                                

> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 200
> 300
> RYW
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 40
> 60
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 0
> 5
> 1K 2K 5K 20K
> 150
> 160
> 170
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 100
> 125
> 150
> MR
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 0
> 5
> 1K 2K 5K 20K
> 80
> 100
> 120
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 0
> 200
> MW
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 50
> 100
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 0
> 5
> 1K 2K 5K 20K
> 0
> 100
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 0
> 200
> RYW+MW
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 50
> 100
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 0
> 5
> 1K 2K 5K 20K
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 75
> 100
> 125
> IDS CC
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 75
> 100
> 125
> 20 30 40 50 60 70
> 0
> 5
> 1K 2K 5K 20K
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 20 30 40 50 60 70

put rate (%)      

> 100
> 150
> LCC
> 20 30 40 50 60 70

put rate (%)      

> 75
> 100
> 125
> 20 30 40 50 60 70

put rate (%)    

> 0
> 5
> 1K 2K 5K 20K

ops per worker (N) 

> 80
> 90

IDS baseline baseline did not finish Figure 9: Per-protocol performance. Top row is Chapar CC (Chapar paper protocol) shown for comparison; the next five rows are the IDS suite specs (RYW, MR, MW, RYW+MW, IDS suite CC); the bottom LCC row is a single-line illustrative trajectory of labeled causal consistency. Columns: throughput (kops/s), p99 latency ( μs), memory peak (MB), and throughput vs ops-per-worker N at put = 50% . Per-protocol y-axes are dedicated so each row’s range is visible. Solid = IDS; dashed 

= reference (function-as-map). Red × marks runs that hit the 180 s wall-clock cap; on MW and RYW+MW the reference times out at every put rate (the reference’s read-then-write check on a function-as-map is the cause; see below). 30 I IDS Suite 

IDS suite is the benchmark dataset of six distributed key-value-store specifications we release alongside the system; together with Chapar’s published causal-consistency spec [ 26 ], they form the seven specifications evaluated in §5. Each specification fixes (i) the abstract spec state and operations the application sees, (ii) the concrete replica state and operations the implementation runs, and (iii) the consistency property the implementation must satisfy. This appendix gives the formal definition of every spec, plus the reference implementations we benchmark in §5. The framework setup below introduces the notation: client programs (Fig. 10), the seven-method AlgDef interface (Fig. 11), the configuration syntax (Fig. 12), the concurrent operational semantics (Fig. 13), the refinement hierarchy (Fig. 14), and a relaxed baseline spec (Fig. 15). 

Summary. Table 8 lists the six IDS suite specifications plus Chapar’s published CC. Each is then introduced in plain English and immediately followed by its formal definition and reference implementation.                    

> spec abbreviation informal guarantee Read-Your-Writes RYW A client’s read sees that client’s own most recent write. Monotonic Reads MR A client’s reads never go back in time relative to writes the client has already seen. Monotonic Writes MW Writes from one client are applied in order at every replica. Read-Your-Writes +Monotonic Writes RYW+MW Composition of RYW and MW; an implementation must refine both. Causal Consistency CC A read returns a value whose causal predecessors have all been observed at the responding replica. Labeled Causal Consistency LCC CC parameterised by per-message topic labels: each client subscribes to a subset of labels and only sees causality enforced on those. Chapar Causal Consistency Chapar CC Chapar’s published CC specification [ 26 ]; see the original paper for its formal definition.

Table 8: The six IDS suite specifications, plus Chapar’s published CC for reference. 31 k : K Key 

v : V ⊇ K Value 

x : V Variable 

i Unique Identifiers 

s : S ::= put i(k, v ); s Statement 

| x ← get i(k); s

| skip 

| Extended Syntax for Internal Statements 

| ⊘ x ← get i(k); s Blocked Get 

c : C Clients 

a : A = C 7 → S Application Figure 10: Client Programs 

I = ( CState , c-init , RState , r-init , Implementation 

get -req , get -guard , get , get -res ,

put -req , put -guard , put )

C Clients 

CState : Type Client State 

c-init : C → CState Client Initial State 

R Replicas 

RState : Type Replica State 

r-init : R → V → RState Replica Initial State 

Get -req -payload , Get -res -payload : Type Get Payload Types 

get -req : ( K)( C, CState ) → (Get -req -payload , CState ) Get Request (at client) 

get -guard : ( K)( Get -req -payload )( C, R, RState ) → Bool Get Guard (at replica) 

get : ( K)( Get -req -payload )( C, R, RState ) → (V × Get -res -payload , RState ) Get (at replica) 

get -res : ( K, V )( Get -res -payload )( C, CState ) → CState Get Response (at client) 

Put -req -payload : Type Put Payload Type 

put -req : ( K, V )( C, CState ) → (Put -req -payload × CState ) Put Request (at client) 

put -guard : ( K, V )( Put -req -payload )( C, R, RState ) → Bool Put Guard (at replica) 

put : ( K, V )( Put -req -payload )( C, R, RState ) → RState Put (at replica) 

Figure 11: Key-Value Store Implementation Interface 32 I = (CState , c-init , RState , r-init , Implementation 

get -req , get -guard , get , get -res ,

put -req , put -guard , put )

W : W := ⟨C , R, N ⟩ World 

c : C Clients 

σ : CState Client State 

C : C 7 → ⟨ CState , S ⟩ Client Programs 

r : R Replicas 

ς : RState Replica State 

R : R 7 → RState Replica States 

N : PM (M ) Network 

M : C × R × Get -req (I, K, Get -req -payload ) Message 

| R × C × Get -res (I, K, V, Get -res -payload )

| C × R × Put -req (K, V, Put -req -payload )

l ::= c ▷ get i(k) Label 

| r ▷ get i(k) : v

| c ▷ get i(k) : v

| c ▷ put (k, v )

| r ▷ put (k, v )

h ::= l∗ History 

ext (h) ::= h | { c ▷ get i(k) : v, c ▷ put (k, v )} External History 

◦ : Unit 

PM (S) ≜ The multiset powerset of the set SW0(a)I ≜ ⟨[c 7 → ⟨ c-init (c), a (c)⟩c∈C ], [r 7 → r-init (r, v 0)r∈R], ∅⟩ 

v0 ≜ The initial value Figure 12: The State of the Key-value Store Operational Semantics 33 GET -R EQ 

c̸ = c0

get -req (k)( c, σ ) ⇝∗ ⟨p, σ ′⟩

(C[c 7 → ⟨ σ, x ← get i(k); s⟩],

R,

N ) 

> c ▷ get i(k)

−−−−−−−→I

(C[c 7 → ⟨ σ′, ⊘ x ← get i(k); s⟩],

R,

N ∪ {⟨ c, r, Get -req (i, k, p )⟩r∈R})

GET 

get -guard (k)( p)( c, r, ς ) ⇝∗ true get (k)( p)( c, r, ς ) ⇝∗ ⟨v, p ′, ς ′⟩

(C,

R[r 7 → ς],

N ∪ {⟨ c, r, Get -req (i, k, p )⟩} ) 

> r ▷ get i(k): v

−−−−−−−−→I

(C,

R[r 7 → ς′],

N ∪ {⟨ r, c, Get -res (i, k, v, p ′)⟩} )

GET -R ES 

get -res (k, v )( p)( c, σ ) ⇝∗ σ′

(C[c 7 → ⟨ σ, ⊘ x ← get i(k); s⟩],

R,

N ∪ {⟨ r, c, Get -res (i, k, v, p )⟩} ) 

> c ▷ get i(k): v

−−−−−−−−→I

(C[c 7 → ⟨ σ′, s [v/x ]⟩],

R,

N )

PUT -R EQ 

c̸ = c0

put -req (k, v )( c, σ ) ⇝∗ ⟨p, σ ′⟩

(C[c 7 → (σ, put (k, v ); s)] ,

R,

N ) 

> c ▷ put (k,v )

−−−−−−−→I

(C[c 7 → (σ′, s )] ,

R,

N ∪ {⟨ c, r, Put -req (k, v, p )⟩r∈R})

PUT 

put -guard (k, v )( p)( c, r, ς ) ⇝∗ true put (k, v )( p)( c, r, ς ) ⇝∗ ς′

(C,

R[r 7 → ς],

N ∪ {⟨ c, r, Put -req (k, v, p )⟩} ) 

> r ▷ put (k,v )

−−−−−−−→I

(C,

R[r 7 → ς′],

N )

Figure 13: Key-value Store Operational Semantics →I for the implementation I = ( CState , c-init ,

RState , r-init , get -req , get -guard , get , get -res , put -req , put -guard , put ).The get operations are synchronous. Therefore, the semantics implicitly preserves the order of get sand succeeding get s and put s. 34 Definition 1 (Trace Inclusion) . An implementation I2 trace-includes another I1, written I2 ⊑ I1, if for all W2, and h2, if W0(a)I2

> h2

−→∗ 

> I2

W2, then there exists h1 and W1 such that W0(a)I1

> h1

−→∗ 

> I1

W1

and ext (h1) = ext (h2).

Definition 2 (Convergence) . An implementation I is convergent if for all R, if W0(a)I −→∗

> I

⟨_, R, ∅⟩ , then for all k, p, c, r1, r2 and v, if get -guard (k)( p)( c, r 1, R[r1]) ⇝∗ true 

and get (k)( p)( c, r 1, R[r1]) ⇝∗ ⟨v, _, _⟩ then get -guard (k)( p)( c, r 2, R[r2]) ⇝∗ true and 

get (k)( p)( c, r 2, R[r2]) ⇝∗ ⟨v, _, _⟩.35 ICC 1 ICC 2

## IRYW -MW I∗

CC 

## IRYW IMW IMR 

## I∗

LCC 

## I∗

RYW I∗

MW I∗

MR 

## IRel 

IRel Relaxed Specification (Fig. 15) 

I∗ 

> RYW

Read Your Writes Specification (Fig. 16) 

IRYW Read Your Writes Implementation (Fig. 17) 

I∗ 

> MR

Monotonic Reads Specification (Fig. 18) 

IMR Monotonic Reads Implementation (Fig. 19) 

I∗ 

> MW

Monotonic Writes Specification (Fig. 20) 

IMW Monotonic Writes Implementation (Fig. 21) 

IRYW -MW Read Your Writes and Monotonic Writes Implementation (Fig. 22) 

I∗ 

> LCC

Labeled Causal Consistency Spec (Fig. 24) 

I∗ 

> CC

Causal Consistency Spec (Fig. 23) 

ICC 1 Causal Consistency Implementation 1 (Fig. 25) 

ICC 2 Causal Consistency Implementation 2 (Fig. 26) 

Figure 14: Refinement Hierarchy 36 IRel (RELAXED SPECIFICATION )

CState := Unit Client State 

c-init (c) := ⊥ Client Initial State 

RState := K 7 → V Replica State 

r-init (r, v 0) := [ k 7 → v0] Replica Initial State 

Get -req -payload := Get -res -payload := Unit Get payload types 

get -req (_)( _, σ ) := At client: Get Request 

ret ⟨◦ , p ⟩ No payload 

get -guard (_)( _)( _, _, _) := At replica: Get Guard 

ret true get (k)( _)( _, _, ς ) := At replica: Get 

let ⟨v, _⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ⟨v, ◦, ς ⟩ No payload 

get -res (_, _)( _)( _, σ ) := At client: Get Response 

ret σ

Put -req -payload := Unit Put payload types 

put -req (k, _)( _, σ ) := At client: Put Request 

ret ⟨◦ , σ ⟩ No payload 

put -guard (_, _)( _)( _, _, _) := At replica: Put Guard 

ret true put (k, v )( _)( _, _, ς ) := At replica: Put 

ret ς[k 7 → v]

Figure 15: Relaxed Specification 

I.1 Read-Your-Writes (RYW) 

A client’s read sees its own most recent write. The session tracks every put the client has issued; the get-guard requires the responding replica to have applied every put in that set (Fig. 16). The reference implementation stores per-replica state as a function from key to timestamp (Fig. 17). 37 I∗ 

> RYW

(READ YOUR WRITES SPECIFICATION )

T := Nat Timestamp 

CState := Client State 

Set [K × T ] Session puts. ( T uniquely identifies puts in a client.) 

c-init (c) := Client Initial State 

∅ No initial puts 

RState := Replica State 

K 7 → (V × C × T × Map from each key k to its value v, its origin ⟨c, t ⟩,

Set [T ]) and timestamps of puts on k before it. 

r-init (r, v 0) := Replica Initial State 

[k 7 → ⟨ v0, c 0, 0, ∅⟩ ]

Get -req -payload := Set [T ] Get payload types 

Get -res -payload := Unit get -req (k)( _, p ) := At client: Get Request 

ret ⟨p|k, p ⟩ Session past puts as request payload, State unchanged 

get -guard (k)( p)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Get Guard 

let ⟨_, c ′, t ′, p ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret c = c′ ⇒ p ⊆ p′ ∪ { t′} If stored value is from requesting client, his puts not missed. 

get (k)( _)( _, _, ς ) := At replica: Get 

let ⟨v, _, _, _⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ⟨v, ◦, ς ⟩ No payload 

get -res (_, _)( _)( _, p ) := At client: Get Response 

ret p State unchanged. 

Put -req -payload := T × Set [T ] Put payload types 

put -req (k, _)( self , p ) := At client: Put Request 

let t ← | p| + 1 Current put timestamp 

let p′ ← p ∪ {⟨ t, k ⟩} The put is added to session puts. 

ret ⟨⟨ t, p |k⟩, p ′⟩ Session puts are sent as request payload. 

put -guard (_, _)( _)( _, _, _) := At replica: Put Guard 

ret true put (k, v )( ⟨t, p ⟩)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put 

ret ς[k 7 → ⟨ v, c, t, p ⟩]

p|k := {t | ⟨ t, k ⟩ ∈ p}

Figure 16: Read Your Writes Specification 38 IRYW (READ YOUR WRITES IMPLEMENTATION )

T := Nat Timestamp 

CState := Client State 

K 7 → T Latest put for each key. ( T uniquely identifies puts in a client.) 

c-init (c) := Client Initial State 

[k 7 → 0] No initial puts 

RState := Replica State 

K 7 → (V × C × T ) Map from each key k to its value v, and its origin ⟨c, t ⟩

r-init (r, v 0) := Replica Initial State 

[k 7 → ⟨ v0, c 0, 0⟩]

Get -req -payload := T Get payload types 

Get -res -payload := Unit get -req (k)( _, p ) := At client: Get Request 

ret ⟨p(k), p ⟩ Timestamp of latest put as request payload, State unchanged 

get -guard (k)( t)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Get Guard 

let ⟨_, c ′, t ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret c = c′ ⇒ t = t′ If stored value is from requesting client, his puts not missed. 

get (k)( _)( _, _, ς ) := At replica: Get 

let ⟨v, _, _⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ⟨v, ◦, ς ⟩ No payload 

get -res (_, _)( _)( _, p ) := At client: Get Response 

ret p State unchanged. 

Put -req -payload := T Put payload types 

put -req (k, _)( self , p ) := At client: Put Request 

let t ← p(k) + 1 Current put timestamp 

let p′ ← p[k 7 → t] The put timestamp is stored as the latest for the key. 

ret ⟨t, p ′⟩ Latest put timestamp sent as request payload. 

put -guard (_, _)( _)( _, _, _) := At replica: Put Guard 

ret true put (k, v )( t)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put 

ret ς[k 7 → ⟨ v, c, t ⟩]

Figure 17: Read Your Writes Implementation 

I.2 Monotonic Reads (MR) 

A client’s reads respect the order of writes the client has previously observed. The session keeps the set of writes seen so far; subsequent reads must return values applied no earlier than every write in that set (Fig. 18). The reference implementation stores per-replica state as a function from key to (value, client, timestamp); the get-guard checks every entry against the client’s session set on every read (Fig. 19). 39 I∗ 

> MR

(MONOTONIC READS SPECIFICATION )

T := Nat Timestamp 

CState := Client State 

Set [T × K] × Session puts. ( C × T uniquely identifies puts.) 

Set [C × T × K] Session dependencies. 

c-init (c) := Client Initial State 

∅ No initial dependencies 

RState := Replica State 

K 7 → (V × C × T × Map from each key K to its value V , its origin C × T

Set [T × K]) and puts before it 

r-init (r, v 0) := Replica Initial State 

[k 7 → ⟨ v0, c 0, 0, ∅⟩ ]

Get -req -payload := Set [C × T ] Get payload types 

Get -res -payload := C × T

get -req (k)( _, ⟨p, d ⟩) := At client: Get Request 

ret ⟨d|k, ⟨p, d ⟩⟩ Session deps for k sent as payload, State unchanged 

get -guard (k)( d)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Get Guard 

let ⟨_, c ′, t ′, d ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret d|c′ ⊆ d′|k ∪ { t′} Stored put from c′ doesn’t miss observed puts from c′.

get (k)( _)( _, _, ς ) := 

let ⟨v, c, t, d ⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ⟨v, ⟨c, t ⟩, ς ⟩ The stored put returned as a dependency. 

get -res (k, _)( ⟨c, t ⟩)( _, ⟨p, d ⟩) := At client: Get Response 

ret ⟨p, d ∪ {⟨ c, t, k ⟩}⟩ Returned dependency added to session dependencies. 

Put -req -payload := T × Set [T × K] Put payload types 

put -req (k, _)( _, ⟨p, d ⟩) := At client: Put Request 

let t ← | p| + 1 Current put timestamp 

let p′ ← p ∪ {⟨ t, k ⟩} The put is added to session puts. 

ret ⟨⟨ t, p ⟩, ⟨p′, d ⟩⟩ Session puts are sent as request payload. 

put -guard (_, _)( _)( _, _, _) := At replica: Put Guard 

ret true put (k, v )( ⟨t, p ⟩)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put 

ret ς[k 7 → ⟨ v, c, t, p ⟩]

d|k := {⟨ c, t ⟩ | ⟨ c, t, k ⟩ ∈ d}

d|k := {t | ⟨ t, k ⟩ ∈ d}

d|c := {t | ⟨ c, t ⟩ ∈ d}

Figure 18: Monotonic Reads Specification 40 IMR (MONOTONIC READS IMPLEMENTATION )

T := Nat Timestamp 

CState := Client State 

T × Session latest put timestamp 

K 7 → C 7 → T Largest timestamp read for the key from the client. 

c-init (c) := Client Initial State 

⟨∅ , ∅⟩ No initial puts and dependencies 

RState := Replica State 

K 7 → (V × C × T ) Map from each key K to its value V , its origin C × T

r-init (r, v 0) := Replica Initial State 

[k 7 → ⟨ v0, c 0, 0⟩]

Get -req -payload := Set [C × T ] Get payload types 

Get -res -payload := C × T

get -req (k)( _, ⟨t, d ⟩) := At client: Get Request 

ret ⟨d(k), ⟨t, d ⟩⟩ Session deps for k sent as payload, State unchanged 

get -guard (k)( d)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Get Guard 

let ⟨_, c ′, t ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret d(c′) ≤ t′ Stored put from c′ doesn’t miss observed puts from c′.

get (k)( _)( _, _, ς ) := 

let ⟨v, c, t ⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ⟨v, ⟨c, t ⟩, ς ⟩ The stored put returned as a dependency. 

get -res (k, _)( ⟨c, t ⟩)( _, ⟨t, d ⟩) := At client: Get Response 

ret ⟨t, d [⟨k, c ⟩ 7 → t]⟩ Returned dependency advances session dependencies. 

Put -req -payload := T Put payload types 

put -req (k, _)( _, ⟨t, d ⟩) := At client: Put Request 

let t′ ← t + 1 Current put timestamp 

ret ⟨t′, ⟨t′, d ⟩⟩ 

put -guard (_, _)( _)( _, _, _) := At replica: Put Guard 

ret true put (k, v )( t)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put 

ret ς[k 7 → ⟨ v, c, t ⟩]

Figure 19: Monotonic Reads Implementation 

I.3 Monotonic Writes (MW) 

A single client’s writes are observed in order at every replica that observes them. Each replica records, per writing client, the latest applied timestamp; the put-guard rejects any out-of-order delivery (Fig. 20). The reference implementation prepends the timestamp of each new write to a per-key list with no de-duplication, so receivers can re-check ordering on every delivery (Fig. 21). 41 I∗ 

> MW

(MONOTONIC WRITES SPECIFICATION )

T := Nat Timestamp 

CState := Client State 

Set [T × K] Session puts. ( C × T uniquely identifies puts.) 

c-init (c) := Client Initial State 

∅ No initial dependencies 

RState := Replica State 

K 7 → (V × Set [C × T ]) Map from each key K to its value V , and puts already applied. 

r-init (r, v 0) := Replica Initial State 

[k 7 → ⟨ v0, ∅⟩ ]

Get -req -payload := Get -res -payload := Unit Get payload types 

get -req (_)( _, p ) := At client: Get Request 

ret ⟨◦ , p ⟩ Session past puts as request payload, State unchanged 

get -guard (_)( _)( _, _, _) := At replica: Get Guard 

ret true get (k)( _)( _, _, ς ) := At replica: Get 

let ⟨v, _⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ⟨v, ◦, ς ⟩ No payload 

get -res (_, _)( _)( _, p ) := At client: Get Response 

ret p State unchanged. 

Put -req -payload := T × Set [T ] Put payload types 

put -req (k, _)( _, p ) := At client: Put Request 

let t ← | p| + 1 Current put timestamp 

let p′ ← p ∪ {⟨ t, k ⟩} The put is added to session puts. 

ret ⟨⟨ t, p |k⟩, p ′⟩ Session puts for the key are sent as request payload. 

put -guard (k, _)( ⟨t, p ⟩)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put Guard 

let ⟨_, p ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret p ⊆ p′|c Previous puts of session already applied. 

put (k, v )( ⟨t, _⟩)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put 

let ⟨_, p ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ς[k 7 → ⟨ v, p ′ ∪ {⟨ c, t ⟩} ]

p|k := {t | ⟨ t, k ⟩ ∈ p}

p|c := {t | ⟨ c, t ⟩ ∈ p}

Figure 20: Monotonic Writes Specification 42 IMW (MONOTONIC WRITES IMPLEMENTATION )

T := Nat Timestamp 

CState := Client State 

K 7 → T Latest timestamp of puts for the key. 

c-init (c) := Client Initial State 

k 7 → 0 No initial puts 

RState := Replica State 

K 7 → (V × Map from each key K to its value V , and 

C 7 → T ) latest puts applied from sessions. 

r-init (r, v 0) := Replica Initial State 

[k 7 → ⟨ v0, c 7 → 0⟩]

Get -req -payload := Get -res -payload := Unit Get payload types 

get -req (_)( _, σ ) := At client: Get Request 

ret ⟨◦ , σ ⟩ Session past puts as request payload, State unchanged 

get -guard (_)( _)( _, _, _) := At replica: Get Guard 

ret true get (k)( _)( _, _, ς ) := At replica: Get 

let ⟨v, _⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ⟨v, ◦, ς ⟩ No payload 

get -res (_, _)( _)( _, σ ) := At client: Get Response 

ret σ State unchanged. 

Put -req -payload := T Put payload types 

put -req (k, _)( _, p ) := At client: Put Request 

t ← p(k)

let p′ ← p[k 7 → t + 1] The timestamp of the latest put for key is advanced. 

ret ⟨t, p ′⟩ Latest put timestamp for the key is sent as request payload. 

put -guard (k, _)( t)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put Guard 

let ⟨_, p ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret p′(c) = t Previous puts of session already applied. 

put (k, v )( t)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put 

let ⟨_, p ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ς[k 7 → ⟨ v, p ′[c 7 → t + 1] ⟩]

Figure 21: Monotonic Writes Implementation 

I.4 Read-Your-Writes + Monotonic Writes (RYW+MW) 

Composition of Read-Your-Writes and Monotonic Writes. RYW+MW is the conjunction of RYW and MW rather than an independent property; an implementation satisfies it iff it refines both, so correctness is the joint refinement obligation. The reference combines RYW’s read-side check with MW’s compare-and-swap on every put (Fig. 22). 43 IRYW -MW (READ YOUR WRITES AND MONOTONIC WRITES IMPLEMENTATION )

T := Nat Timestamp 

CState := Client State 

K 7 → T Latest timestamp of puts for the key. 

c-init (c) := Client Initial State 

k 7 → 0 No initial puts 

RState := Replica State 

K 7 → (V × C × Map from each key K to its value V , and its originating sessions C,

C 7 → T ) latest puts applied from sessions 

r-init (r, v 0) := Replica Initial State 

[k 7 → ⟨ v0, 0, c 7 → 0⟩]

Get -req -payload := T Get payload types 

Get -res -payload := Unit get -req (k)( _, p ) := At client: Get Request 

ret ⟨p(k), p ⟩ Timestamp of latest put as request payload, State unchanged 

get -guard (k)( t)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Get Guard 

let ⟨_, c ′, p ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret c = c′ ⇒ p′(c′) = t If stored value is from requesting client, his puts not missed. 

get (k)( _)( _, _, ς ) := At replica: Get 

let ⟨v, _, _⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ⟨v, ◦, ς ⟩ No payload 

get -res (_, _)( _)( _, p ) := At client: Get Response 

ret p State unchanged. 

Put -req -payload := T Put payload types 

put -req (k, _)( _, p ) := At client: Put Request 

t ← p(k)

let p′ ← p[k 7 → t + 1] The timestamp of the latest put for key is advanced. 

ret ⟨t, p ′⟩ Latest put timestamp for the key is sent as request payload. 

put -guard (k, _)( t)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put Guard 

let ⟨_, _, p ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret p′(c) = t Previous puts of session already applied. 

put (k, v )( t)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put 

let ⟨_, p ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ς[k 7 → ⟨ v, c, p ′[c 7 → t + 1] ⟩]

Figure 22: Read Your Writes and Monotonic Writes Implementation 

I.5 Causal Consistency (CC) and Labeled Causal Consistency (LCC) Causal Consistency (CC). Cross-client causal consistency: every read returns a value whose causal predecessors have all been observed at the responding replica. Dependencies are tracked as explicit sets in the spec state (Fig. 23), which the implementation must bridge to its concrete representation (typically a per-client vector clock plus a compare-and-swap on the writer’s own slot during put). Two reference implementations are given: a per-client vector-clock store (Fig. 25) and a Lloyd–Freedman-style protocol (Fig. 26). 

Labeled Causal Consistency (LCC). Causal consistency parameterised by per-message topic labels and per-client interest masks. Every put is tagged with a label, and every client declares which labels it cares about; the get-guard requires the responding replica to have observed every dependency whose label is in the requesting client’s mask (Fig. 24). To our knowledge this is the first Rocq formalisation of LCC and the first verified implementation. 44 I∗ 

> CC

(CAUSAL CONSISTENCY SPEC )

T := Nat Timestamp 

CState := Client State 

⟨Set [C × T × K], Session dependencies from puts. 

Set [Set [C × T × K]] ⟩ Session dependencies from gets (C × T uniquely identifies puts.) 

c-init (c) := Client Initial State 

⟨∅ , ∅⟩ No initial dependencies 

RState := Replica State 

K 7 → (V × C × T × Map from each key K to its value V , its origin C × T ,

Set [C × T × K]) and set of dependencies 

r-init (r, v 0) := Replica Initial State 

[k 7 → ⟨ v0, c 0, 0, ∅⟩ ] Empty initial dependencies 

Get -req -payload := ⟨Set [C × T × K], Get payload types 

Set [Set [C × T × K]] ⟩

Get -res -payload := Set [C × T × K]

get -req (k)( _, ⟨p, G ⟩) := At client: Get Request 

ret ⟨⟨ p|k, G |k⟩, ⟨p, G ⟩⟩ Session deps sent as request payload, State unchanged 

get -guard (k)( ⟨p, G ⟩)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Get Guard 

let ⟨_, c ′, t ′, d ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret forall (λd. ¬(d′|k ∪ {⟨ c′, t ′, k ⟩} ⊂ d)) G ∧ Stored value isn’t behind any previously read value. 

c = c′ ⇒ p ⊆ d′|k ∪ {⟨ c′, t ′, k ⟩} Read your writes. 

get (k)( _)( _, _, ς ) := At replica: Get 

let ⟨v, c, t, d ⟩ ← ς(k)

let d′ ← if (c̸ = c0) d ∪ {⟨ c, t, k ⟩} else ∅ The dependencies returned to the session 

ret ⟨v, d ′, ς ⟩ are the entry and its dependencies 

get -res (_, _)( d′)( _, ⟨p, G ⟩) := At client: Get Response 

ret ⟨p, G ∪ { d′}⟩ Received dependencies added to session dependencies. 

Put -req -payload := T × Set [C × T × K] Put payload types 

put -req (k, _)( self , ⟨p, G ⟩) := At client: Put Request 

let t ← | p| + 1 Current put timestamp 

let p′ ← p ∪ {⟨ self , t, k ⟩} The put is added to session dependencies. 

ret ⟨⟨ t, p ∪ (S G)⟩, ⟨p′, G ⟩⟩ Session dependencies are sent as request payload. 

put -guard (k, _)( ⟨t, _⟩)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put Guard 

let ⟨_, _, _, d ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ⟨c, t, k ⟩̸ ∈ d′ The new put is not causally before the current stored put. 

put (k, v )( ⟨t, d ⟩)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put 

ret ς[k 7 → ⟨ v, c, t, d ⟩]

d|k := {⟨ c, t, k ⟩ | ⟨ c, t, k ′⟩ ∈ d ∧ k = k′}

D|k := {d|k | d ∈ D}

Figure 23: Causal Consistency Spec 45 I∗ 

> LCC

(LABELED CAUSAL CONSISTENCY SPEC )

L Label type 

label : V → L Maps each value to its label 

client -labels : C → Set [L] Maps each client to its set of relevant labels 

T := Nat Timestamp 

CState := Client State 

⟨Set [C × T × K × L], Session dependencies from puts (with labels) 

Set [Set [C × T × K × L]] ⟩ Session dependencies from gets (with labels) 

c-init (c) := Client Initial State 

⟨∅ , ∅⟩ No initial dependencies 

RState := Replica State 

K 7 → (V × C × T × Map from each key K to its value V , its origin C × T ,

Set [C × T × K × L]) and set of label-annotated dependencies 

r-init (r, v 0) := Replica Initial State 

[k 7 → ⟨ v0, c 0, 0, ∅⟩ ] Empty initial dependencies 

Get -req -payload := ⟨Set [C × T × K × L] Get payload types 

Set [Set [C × T × K × L]] 

Get -res -payload := Set [C × T × K × L]

get -req (k)( self , ⟨p, G ⟩) := At client: Get Request 

let L ← client -labels (self )

ret ⟨⟨ p|k|L, G |k|L⟩, ⟨p, G ⟩⟩ Label-filtered deps sent as payload; state unchanged. 

get -guard (k)( ⟨p, G ⟩)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Get Guard 

let ⟨v′, c ′, t ′, d ′⟩ ← ς(k)

let L ← client -labels (c)

ret forall (λd. Stored value not behind any previously 

¬(( d′|k ∪ {⟨ c′, t ′, k, label (v′)⟩} )|L ⊂ d)) G read value, for client’s labels. 

∧ c = c′ ⇒ p ⊆ d′|k ∪ {⟨ c′, t ′, k, label (v′)⟩} Read your writes. 

get (k)( _)( _, _, ς ) := At replica: Get 

let ⟨v, c, t, d ⟩ ← ς(k)

let d′ ← if (c̸ = c0) d ∪ {⟨ c, t, k, label (v)⟩} else ∅ Label of stored value included in returned dependency. 

ret ⟨v, d ′, ς ⟩

get -res (_, _)( d′)( _, ⟨p, G ⟩) := At client: Get Response 

ret ⟨p, G ∪ { d′}⟩ Received dependencies added to session. 

Put -req -payload := T × Set [C × T × K × L] Put payload types 

put -req (k, v )( self , ⟨p, G ⟩) := At client: Put Request 

let t ← | p| + 1 Current put timestamp 

let p′ ← p ∪ {⟨ self , t, k, label (v)⟩} Put with its label added to session dependencies. 

ret ⟨⟨ t, p ∪ (S G)⟩, ⟨p′, G ⟩⟩ All session dependencies sent as request payload. 

put -guard (k, v )( ⟨t, _⟩)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put Guard 

let ⟨_, _, _, d ′⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ⟨c, t, k, label (v)⟩̸ ∈ d′ The new put has not already been applied. 

put (k, v )( ⟨t, d ⟩)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put 

ret ς[k 7 → ⟨ v, c, t, d ⟩]

d|k := {⟨ c, t, k, l ⟩ | ⟨ c, t, k ′, l ⟩ ∈ d ∧ k = k′}

D|k := {d|k | d ∈ D}

d|L := {⟨ c, t, k, l ⟩ | ⟨ c, t, k, l ⟩ ∈ d ∧ l ∈ L} Filter dependencies to the label set L

D|L := {d|L | d ∈ D}

Figure 24: Labeled Causal Consistency Spec. Causal consistency — but per topic. Every put is tagged with a label (think: Kafka topic, Slack channel, pub/sub subject). Every client declares which labels it cares about. Causal delivery for a client is enforced only for labels the client is interested in. 46 ICC 1 (CAUSAL CONSISTENCY IMPLEMENTATION 1)

T := Nat Timestamp 

CState := Client State 

C 7 → T Session vector-clock 

c-init (c) := Client Initial State 

[c 7 → 0] No initial dependencies 

RState := Replica State 

⟨K 7 → V, Store 

C 7 → T ⟩ Received vector-clock (one for all keys) 

r-init (r, v 0) := Replica Initial State 

⟨[k 7 → v0], [c 7 → 0] ⟩ Empty initial dependencies 

Get -req -payload := C 7 → T Get payload types 

Get -res -payload := C 7 → T

get -req (_)( _, d ) := At client: Get Request 

ret ⟨d, d ⟩ Session vector-clock (1) sent as request payload (2) remains unchanged 

get -guard (k)( d)( _, _, ς ) := At replica: Get Guard 

let ⟨_, r ⟩ ← ς

ret r ≥ d Pointwise comparison of vector clocks. Store is ahead of session 

get (k)( _)( _, _, ς ) := At replica: Get 

let ⟨s, r ⟩ ← ς

let v ← s(k)

ret ⟨v, r, ς ⟩

get -res (_, _)( r)( _, d ) := At client: Get Response 

ret max (d, r ) Pointwise max of vector-clocks 

Put -req -payload := C 7 → T Put payload types 

put -req (_, _)( self , d ) := At client: Put Request 

let d′ ← d[self 7 → d(self ) + 1] Session dependencies advanced. 

ret ⟨d, d ′⟩ Session vector-clock is sent as request payload. 

put -guard (_, _)( d)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put Guard 

let ⟨_, r ⟩ ← ς

ret r ≥ d ∧ r(c) = d(c) Store satisfies the dependencies. The new put advances the store. 

put (k, v )( d)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put 

let ⟨s, r ⟩ ← ς

let r′ ← r[c 7 → d(c) + 1] Received advanced 

s′ ← s[k 7 → v]

ret ⟨s′, r ′⟩

Figure 25: Causal Consistency Implementation 1 (Inspired by [2]). 47 ICC 2 (CAUSAL CONSISTENCY IMPLEMENTATION 2)

T := Nat Timestamp 

CState := Client State 

T × List [C × T ] Put timestamp, and Session dependencies 

c-init (c) := Client Initial State 

⟨0, ∅⟩ Timestamp zero. No initial dependencies. 

RState := Replica State 

⟨K 7 → C × T × V, Store ( C × T uniquely identifies puts.) 

C 7 → T ⟩ Received vector-clock 

r-init (r, v 0) := Replica Initial State 

⟨[k 7 → ⟨ c0, 0, v 0⟩], [c 7 → 0] ⟩ Nothing initially received 

Get -req -payload := List [C × T ] Get payload types 

Get -res -payload := C × T

get -req (_)( _, σ ) := At client: Get Request 

let ⟨_, d ⟩ ← σ

ret ⟨d, σ ⟩ Session dependencies sent as request payload 

get -guard (_)( d)( _, _, ς ) := At replica: Get Guard 

let ⟨_, r ⟩ ← ς

ret forall (λ(c, t ). r (c) ≥ t) d Store satisfies the dependencies 

get (k)( _)( _, _, ς ) := At replica: Get 

let ⟨s, _⟩ ← ς

let ⟨c, t, v ⟩ ← ς(k)

ret ⟨v, ⟨c, t ⟩, ς ⟩

get -res (_, _)( ⟨c, t ⟩)( _, σ ) := At client: Get Response 

let ⟨t′, d ⟩ ← σ

let d′ ← d :: ⟨c, t ⟩

ret ⟨t′, d ′⟩

Put -req -payload := List [C × T ] Put payload types 

put -req (_, _)( c, σ ) := At client: Put Request 

let ⟨t, d ⟩ ← σ

let t′ ← t + 1 

let d′ ← [⟨c, t ′⟩]

ret ⟨d, ⟨t′, d ′⟩⟩ Session dependencies sent as request payload. 

put -guard (_, _)( d)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put Guard 

let ⟨_, r ⟩ ← ς

ret forall (λ(c, t ). r (c) ≥ t) d Store satisfies the dependencies 

lookup (c, d, 0) = r(c) The new put advances the store 

put (k, v )( _)( c, _, ς ) := At replica: Put 

let ⟨s, r ⟩ ← ς

let t ← r(c) + 1 Current put timestamp 

let r′ ← r[c 7 → t]

s′ ← s[k 7 → ⟨ c, t, v ⟩]

ret ⟨s′, r ′⟩

Figure 26: Causal Consistency Implementation 2 (Inspired by [28]). 

I.6 Chapar Causal Consistency 

For Chapar CC we use Chapar’s published causal-consistency specification [ 26 ]; we refer the reader to the original paper for its formal definition. Per-operation cost comparison appears in App. D. 48