Title: "It Felt a Bit Eerie": Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.24729v1

Published Time: Tue, 26 May 2026 01:07:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# "It Felt a Bit Eerie": Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 

## MICHAEL YIN, University of British Columbia, Canada 

## ANGELA CHIANG, University of British Columbia, Canada 

## SAMUEL RHYS COX, Aalborg University, Denmark 

## ROBERT XIAO, University of British Columbia, Canada 

While human–AI collaboration systems have increasingly been built to increase efficiency or support creativity, little work has examined how the design of interactions shapes the social connection between human and artificial agent. We examine how the temporal and visual dimensions of collaboration shape the experience of a writing task. Specifically, we built three variants of an AI-assisted text editor along a spectrum of simulated humanlike interaction (synchronous and with a cursor) to machinelike interaction (asynchronous and without a cursor), and conducted a comparative user study (n=48). Our exploratory findings suggest that synchronous suggestions increased efficiency but led to contextual misalignment, while a visual cursor increased intent understanding but evoked feelings of surveillance. Taken together, humanlike design of artificial agents can create positive social expectations but also elicit social costs, especially without the alignment present in human–human collaboration. We extend our findings into design implications and ethical considerations when building human–AI collaboration systems. CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI .Additional Key Words and Phrases: Large Language Models (LLMs); Artificial Agents; Generative AI; Synchrony; Apparent Effort; Collaborative Writing; Text Editing 

ACM Reference Format: 

Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao. 2026. "It Felt a Bit Eerie": Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent. 1, 1 (May 2026), 29 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn 

1 Introduction 

As the capabilities of AI systems rapidly advance, increasing amounts of HCI research have examined the potentials and challenges of human–AI collaboration. Human–AI collaboration, which involves integrating AI into present human working environments [ 32 , 112 ], has been explored and applied across various domains for improving efficiency and productivity [ 20 , 33 ], spurring creativity [ 44 , 46 ], and generating feelings of social support [ 73 , 123 ]. However, this can come at the expense of human autonomy and emotional reliance [ 46 , 123 ], which loosely tie to basic human needs [ 22 ]. In particular, the social relationship between AI systems and humans is important in shaping such benefits and tensions. Researchers find that users anthropomorphize AI systems [ 5 , 14 , 102 , 107 ] and even form deep relationships [ 66 , 80 ], 

Authors’ Contact Information: Michael Yin, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, jiyin@cs.ubc.ca; Angela Chiang, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, achi2048@student.ubc.ca; Samuel Rhys Cox, srcox@cs.aau.dk, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark; Robert Xiao, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, brx@cs.ubc.ca. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. Manuscript submitted to ACM Manuscript submitted to ACM 1

> arXiv:2605.24729v1 [cs.HC] 23 May 2026

2 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao as the line between their perception of such systems as being humanlike or machinelike blurs. The anthropomorphic views that people hold towards AI systems shape the way in which users adopt, trust, and use them [15]. Anthropomorphism is one factor that shapes the broader understanding of technology use, an enduring dimension of HCI research. Nass et al. [ 89 ] proposed the Computers are Social Actors (CASA) theory, highlighting how people have social responses to technology that draw from human–human interaction norms, allowing even primitive humanlike cues to elicit powerful social responses [ 88 , 89 ]. Over time, various cues have been explored for potentially evoking different social responses to technological systems, such as simulated voice [ 89 , 104 ], appearance [ 16 , 58 , 75 ], personality [ 85 , 96 ], and sociolects [ 5 ]. Across such studies, researchers show how design cues can shape people’s attitudes, trust, and feelings of psychological distance towards technological systems; this has increasingly been relevant in AI contexts with the prevailing incorporation of large language models (LLMs) that respond in humanlike manners. However, many previously studied cues are innate elements of the system; they represent a consistent underlying quality embedded into the system. Less work has examined the design of interaction elements — elements that shape individual interactions with technology, such as when interaction occurs and how the interaction is visually presented. While recent research has begun to study the temporal [ 12 , 64 , 79 ] and visual quality [ 21 , 125 ] of interaction design, our work looks uniquely at how intentionally shaping these interactional dimensions to be more humanlike affects people’s experiences in a collaborative task, and their social perception of the AI system (and its underlying artificial agent ). To study this, we built and explored three variants of a human–AI collaborative writing system. Inspired by synchronous peer editors such as Google Docs [ 40 ], our system involves an artificial agent acting as the peer in providing suggestions to user-written content. The variants vary on the spectrum of temporal humanlikeness (whether the changes are presented autonomously during writing or only upon user prompting) and visual humanlikeness (whether the AI needs to move a cursor and type character by character or it makes changes immediately). Using these variants, we conduct a comparative user study (n=48) to explore the singular research question of: 

RQ : How does simulated temporal and visual humanlikeness shape experience and social perception in a human–AI collaborative writing task? When the agent made suggestions autonomously and synchronously, participants felt more efficient in embedding suggestions directly into their writing. However, participants also actively monitored the agent for changes and felt distracted, and were furthermore influenced by the agent’s suggestions during the ongoing writing process. When the agent had a cursor that moved around while suggesting, participants felt that they had a better understanding of the agent’s intention. Yet, this caused them to react to such intention, waiting and anticipating the agent’s response. Taken together, while humanlike collaborative systems do elicit social presence , this can potentially lead to 

social costs as well — participants at times felt monitored by, judged by, and compared against the agent. These costs were exacerbated by insufficient alignment between the human and the artificial agent, compared to interacting with known humans, but could be somewhat alleviated through visible alignment and shared understanding. Altogether, we contextualize these findings around prior psychological theory, drawing out how social presence in humanlike agents may both support and strain collaboration, and highlighting implications for the design of more visibly aligned collaborative systems. 

2 Related Work 

We consider prior literature to contextualize our research. We examine technology’s role beyond its practical outcome, specifying how AI-embedded systems can take on social roles that people relate to and interpret. We consider how 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 3design can shape engagement with the artificial agents of such systems, and how research has examined both positive and negative consequences of engagement. Finally, we investigate the role of artificial agents more specifically in a collaborative writing context, and how our work extends the literature on system design in this area. 

2.1 Technology’s Role as Social Agents 

Nass et al.’s Computers Are Social Actors (CASA) theory [ 89 ] proposes that people interact socially with technology, applying human norms in response to even primitive humanlike cues. Researchers have shown that how technological systems interact with people shapes how they are perceived socially; for example, specific choices of human voice incorporated into a computer can strengthen perceptions of it as a social agent [ 65 , 88 ]. CASA theory has been widely engaged with, extended, and critiqued over the years. Gambino et al. [ 34 ] highlight that one reason a more nuanced understanding of CASA is required is simply that humans (and the way they interact with technologies) have changed; Lang et al. [ 63 ] highlight that desensitization through common use may shift social attitudes towards technological systems. With the development of newer technologies such as robots and chatbots, researchers have once again drawn on CASA theory to contextualize digital interactions with such systems. Seok et al. [ 105 ] adopted CASA to explain acceptance of LLMs, highlighting how user personality traits play a role in social perception. Baseman et al. [ 4]studied psychotherapists’ role-playing with LLM-based virtual patients, demonstrating these technologies’ power in eliciting social responses. Cues such as identity and expression can further evoke social responses in interactions with LLM-driven chatbots [72]. One driving factor behind the social responses outlined in CASA is the human tendency to anthropomorphize [ 88 ,115 ]. Anthropomorphization has been heavily discussed in the AI domain [ 74 , 75 , 100 ], especially in regards to LLMs [ 5, 14 , 102 , 107 ]. LLMs have become increasingly social and humanlike in their responses, which leads to innate anthropomorphization [ 50 ]; users may personify such systems as friends or romantic partners [ 66 , 70 , 80 ]. Such systems can offer companionship, social engagement, and a space for support [ 77 ], and are therefore used in both personal [66, 70, 80] and business [43, 49, 62, 101] settings. Yet, anthropomorphism can also lead to a number of well-studied challenges. For instance, research has explored concerns around misplacement of trust and overestimation of humanlike capabilities [ 50 , 52 ], as LLM interactions shape mental attributions and subsequent user feelings [ 1, 18 ]. A strong social connection with LLMs can even make hallucinated information seem trustworthy when presented amicably [ 81 ], and the companionship offered by LLMs can easily sway into emotional attachment and dependency [71, 116]. Altogether, humans innately respond to cues and anthropomorphize technological systems, including artificial agents. Our work extends existing CASA by exploring how eliciting humanlikeness through temporal and visual interaction cues during a collaborative writing task shapes the overall experience. We explore how such factors shape social responses and what happens when social expectations are met or mismatched. 

2.2 The Role of Design for Artificial Agents 

Although humans innately anthropomorphize technology, specific design decisions can exacerbate humanlike perception and social response. For instance, voice [ 89 , 104 ] and appearance [ 16 , 58 , 75 ] are two major design elements that shape responses and feelings towards artificial agents, mediating attitudes towards the agent and the level of psychological distance [ 75 ]. Other design elements, such as conversational style and expressivity, also shift attitudes and feelings of social presence during interactions with technology [2, 5, 16]. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

4 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao While personality, appearance, and voice are design qualities inherent to the agent , our work explores design qualities inherent to interactions . We first consider temporality — cues that affect when interactions are completed. Prior literature on human–chatbot interactions [ 39 , 106 ] suggests that instantaneous responses by chatbots are less humanlike, affecting user perception of the chatbot as a social agent; this has extended into research on LLMs [ 28 , 109 ]. Buçinca et al. [ 12 ] studied how forcing functions, which affect when and how LLM responses are shown, shape more mindful engagement with LLM agents; we draw a comparison between their work and Cox et al.’s design frictions [ 19 ]. More mindful interaction (opposed to mindless anthropomorphization) could also potentially affect social presence and CASA response [ 115 ]. The temporal element of generative AI delay in different contexts can also offer a signal of effort and a period for anticipation [64], potentially shaping trust towards the system [79]. We also consider the visuality of action — cues that show how the interaction is completed. Zhou and Hu [ 125 ]highlight how extending the response generation of LLMs with small humanlike typing behaviours (hesitation, self-editing) can make LLM systems feel more natural and trustworthy. Cox et al. [ 21 ] highlight how visual displays of "thinking" as short reflective statements also shape anthropomorphization of the agent and user expectations. Understanding how design shapes experience is important — design can induce both positive and negative social outcomes. While Li et al. [ 72 ] highlight how human social responses towards generative AI can give rise to prosocial behaviour in certain contexts, Mazhar et al. [ 86 ] show that this may also lead to long-term reliance in other contexts. More broadly, we draw a connection between the negative social outcomes of LLMs and the ethically-problematic dark patterns , which use design to undermine a user’s best interests [ 10 , 13 , 41 ]. For instance, Krämer et al. [ 60 ] highlight how the social cues of LLM systems may elicit trust beyond the system’s capabilities. This is especially problematic given LLMs’ existing biases [ 99 ], and their propensity to shape user attitudes towards social issues when designed in specific ways (e.g. as autocomplete suggestions [114]). LLMs continue to be explored in social roles in domains such as mental health support [ 37 , 55 , 90 ], clinical work-flows [ 69 , 108 ], and education [ 93 , 110 ]. Thus, understanding how interaction cues during a task shape social relation-ships and user attitudes is imperative (which can exist almost independently of the generative content). We use prior knowledge and implications of technological design to contextualize how design cues that elicit visual and temporal humanlikeness shape experiences and attitudes during collaborative writing. 

2.3 Writing with Other Humans and Artificial Agents 

In 2010, Google introduced a feature to allow people to see real-time edits to Google Docs files from other users [ 40 ], as a form of human–human collaborative real-time editing [ 30 ]. In collaborative writing, awareness of others shapes the context of one’s own activity [ 25 ]. Liu and Lan highlight how text-based collaboration can support participation and engagement [ 48 , 78 ], creating a social, communal space to share, act, and know [ 76 , 98 ]. Extending this social basis, Jung et al. find that collaboration on Google Docs shifts the turn-taking nature of social collaboration towards simultaneous working [ 56 ]. Such collaboration supported divided participation, shifting social connection and group awareness [ 56 ]. Overall, synchronous collaboration tools shape social connectivity and group dynamics in ways that differ from asynchronous interaction [9, 103]. Rapid improvements in AI capabilities have enabled the development of systems that support writing “collaboratively” with AI agents. For instance, VISAR is an AI-enabled writing assistance system that supports the writing process during various steps, helping with brainstorming, organization, and argumentation [ 122 ]. Lehmann et al. developed a collaborative text editor that involves multiple users and artificial agents [ 68 ]. They considered how writers create and interact with these agents, finding that authors both supervise and delegate to their agents [ 68 ]. At a broader level, 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 5Reza et al. conducted a literature review on AI interventions in writing processes [ 97 ], highlighting prior strategies for writing support and their effects on agency and ownership. Since the public release of LLMs, turn-based prompting has been the dominant form of interaction [ 35 ]. In accordance, AI writing-support tools often mimic this turn-based creation paradigm [ 57 , 87 , 97 ] instead of providing the real-time collaborative editing interactions. While some research has explored synchronous collaboration, they primarily focus on system function and usability rather than design [ 68 ]. Yet, design is important — even subtle factors such as typing speed [ 124 ], intrusiveness of suggestions [ 117 ], and the hierarchical level of comments [ 24 ], all shape the experience of AI-assisted writing. As such, there is an evident gap in design and dynamics between human–human collaboration and human–AI collaboration in writing, motivating our choice of the domain. Research can more deeply consider the impact of design during collaboration with an artificial agent (and their potential social consequences); we explore this gap in our work. 

3 System Implementation 

Our research question considers the effects of two independent variables of humanlike agentic behaviour — temporal humanlikeness and visual humanlikeness — in collaborative tasks. In particular, our research specifically applies these variables to the specific task of peer editing, in which humans are tasked with creating a written response to a prompt, and an artificial agent aims to help them by providing subjective suggestions for improvement. This was inspired by collaborative text editing processes on existing platforms such as Google Docs or Overleaf [30]. Thus, we built a custom text editor that was hosted online. In this section, we discuss how we augmented this base text editor with an artificial agent acting as a peer editor. This agent made suggestions for the user’s written text in three different ways ( three variants ) that span the spectrum of humanlikeness in interaction. 

3.1 Three Variants of an AI-Assisted Text Editor 

3.1.1 Types of Suggestions. While the artificial agent behaves differently in when and how it makes suggestions, the actual suite of suggestions in all variants was always constant. In particular, there are two types of suggestions, which are represented in an Editing Pane on the right of the textbox (the Text Editor ) — see Figures 1, 2, and 3 for examples of our overall text editor and the two types of suggestions: 

• Replacement : A suggestion to replace a phrase or sentence with an improved version. The text to be replaced is highlighted and struck out, while the new suggested text is inserted after in a new text and highlight colour. This is akin to how Suggestion Mode works on Google Docs; similarly, the human writer can choose to accept or 

reject the suggestion by clicking a button in the Editing Pane. 

• Comment : A suggestion to attach a comment to a part of the text. The comment appears in a textbox in the Editing Pane. This is akin to how Comment Mode works on Google Docs. The human writer can choose to delete 

the comment if they wish to, by clicking on a button in the Editing Pane. 

3.1.2 Mapping Independent Variables. Next, we highlight how we integrate our independent variables into the design of a standard text editor, which we use in a collaborative writing task. 

• Temporal Humanlikeness : Autonomous Action and Collaboration Synchrony : In our study, we position temporal humanlikeness as a binary variable, contrasting synchronous, autonomous collaboration that occurs while the user is writing with asynchronous, user-initiated collaboration that occurs only under the user’s control. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

6 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao 

– In conditions involving temporally humanlike collaboration , the agent works alongside the human in real time, autonomously suggesting text as the user writes without needing to be prompted. 

– In conditions involving temporally nonhumanlike collaboration , the agent works separately from the human writing process, only suggesting text when the user stops writing and explicitly prompts it for suggestions and feedback. 

• Visual Humanlikeness : Apparent Effort and an Agentic Cursor : We operationalize visual humanlikeness through an agentic cursor, which visually represents the agent’s apparent effort during collaboration. 

– In conditions involving visually humanlike collaboration , the interface includes an agentic cursor that makes the agent appear to navigate the text using a cursor as a human would. For instance, to make a suggestion, the agent appears to navigate its cursor to the correct location, highlight the relevant text character by character, and type the replacement text character by character. In this way, it mimics the visible inefficiency and effort of human editing, constrained by typing and cursor navigation. Furthermore, this condition also conveys the humanlike effort of reading, as the cursor idly moves forward, fidgets, and teleports even when not suggesting (discussed further in § 3.2). 

– In conditions involving visually nonhumanlike collaboration , the interface does not include an agentic cursor. Instead, the agent’s suggestions appear instantly. Given the construction of these design features that serve as representations of our independent variables, we consequently develop 3 variants of the text editor: 

• Variant 1 Temporally Nonhumanlike / Visually Nonhumanlike : Figure 1 

• Variant 2 Temporally Humanlike / Visually Nonhumanlike : Figure 2 

• Variant 3 Temporally Humanlike / Visually Humanlike : Figure 3 We did not include a condition combining temporal nonhumanlikeness with visual humanlikeness, as this combination was conceptually inconsistent with the logic of our manipulation — the agentic cursor is intended to visualize humanlike effort during the peer editing process as it unfolds over time , whereas asynchronous, user-prompted suggestions occur at a discrete moment. Overall, these variants represent a spectrum of the most machinelike behaviour ( Variant 1 ) to the most humanlike behaviour ( Variant 3 ). 

3.2 Developing Heuristics Through Formative Studies 

The task of mimicking humanlikeness — both temporally regarding the frequency of autonomous action and visually regarding the actions for apparent effort — using available digital tools required us to develop heuristics of humanlike behaviour, e.g., how often a suggestion should be made, how the cursor should move, and so forth. To imbue a machine with humanlike behaviour, we first needed to understand how humans themselves operate during collaboration. We performed a short, small-scale formative study (approved by our ethics board) with 8 colleagues (all HCI researchers). In this formative study, the researcher would write out a standard prepared essay (on the prompt: “ Write a short opinion piece to describe your views on how smartphones affect people’s daily lives ”1), and the participants would serve the role as the collaborative peer editor, the eventual role given to the artificial agent in our system. We collected participants’ interactions on the page and performed a brief interview about their decisions during collaboration. This formative study informed several design decisions. For instance, our original consideration of the system included having the agent make changes directly on the text rather than suggestions. However, participants generally 

> 1This is a modernized interpretation of the first prompt found in an ASAP dataset [84] Manuscript submitted to ACM

Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 7

> Fig. 1. Variant 1 of our text editor. In (1), the author writes out the text that they would like feedback on, and upon pressing a button (not visible, but under the text box), the AI provides feedback, i.e., seen in (2).

did not change text directly, citing politeness and not wanting to encroach on the writer’s content. By timing participant interactions, we were also able to understand the general distribution of when changes were made and the average time between suggestions. We were also able to broadly understand participants’ general cursor movement, as most participants moved their cursor sentence-by-sentence as they read, while also jumping back and forth or fidgeting. Beyond this formative study, we also drew upon heuristics within the literature (e.g. the speed and variance at which the agent “typed” was informed by the interkey interval of a fast typer [ 23 ]) as well as our own judgment of what heuristics were appropriate (e.g. clamping the rate of suggestions to never be too fast or too slow, etc.) Although we observed these behaviours and tried to encode them into our humanlike AI through guided rules to the best of our abilities (e.g. would randomly select what type of motion to do based on a defined distribution, at what frequency, etc.), we ultimately acknowledge limitations. Firstly, these were tweaked subjectively until the researcher felt they seemed humanlike when compared to the observations in the formative studies, and secondly, taking an average approximation (e.g. the average time between suggestions) is not always humanlike — there is no "average" human. 

3.3 Technical Implementation 

Our text editor was developed and hosted on the Internet, accessible through a web browser. The front-end was created using the React library, in JavaScript, HTML, and CSS. In particular, we used the open-source ProseMirror toolkit 2 for creating and adding custom functionality to the text editor. Our system’s back-end, which managed data logging and was responsible for OpenAI (gpt-4o) API calls, was developed in Python using the Flask 3 library. These API calls took 

> 2https://prosemirror.net/
> 3https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/stable/ Manuscript submitted to ACM

8 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao 

> Fig. 2. Variant 2 of our text editor. While the author is writing, as in (1), the AI makes suggestions along the way. These suggestions (i.e., the highlighted text and comment box) appear instantaneously, such as the comment suggestions in (2) and (3).

an input JSON object of (1) the present written text, chunked by paragraph, and (2) the previous suggestions, to return new suggestions for the text. Specific prompts used for these API calls can be found in Appendix A. 

4 User Study 4.1 Study Protocol 

In designing the user study, we chose to perform a primarily between-subjects design over a within-subjects design for two main reasons: (1) practicality, due to the excessive effort and time that it would take for participants to complete a writing task 3 times, and (2) potentially associated carryover effects, coming from needing to maintain a similar degree of initial interest and engagement across 3 conditions. However, one potential limitation of a purely between-subjects design is that it lacks the richness of comparison that comes from experiencing several conditions. As a result, we adjusted our study accordingly, and each user study session involved: 

• A main writing task. Participants were provided a standard writing prompt used in the formative study (i.e., “ Write a short opinion piece to describe your views on how smartphones affect people’s daily lives ”) and 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 9

Fig. 3. Variant 3 of our text editor. While the author is writing, as in (1), the AI has an agentic cursor that it moves within the text. While the author writes, the AI decides to suggest (2). The AI navigates its cursor to the proposed suggestion location and both highlights and types out the suggestion character by character, much like a human would need to. In (3), we see again how the AI needs to type out a comment character by character as well, with all the suggestions seen in totality in (4). 

instructed to write an essay based on this prompt, with the agent collaborating on the task. Although up to their own interpretation and writing style, we mentioned that participants could simply write a standard essay split into multiple paragraphs. The writing task continued until the participants finished, but was capped at approximately 25 minutes. Participants’ experience of the main writing task was captured and compared through both quantitative and qualitative data. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

10 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao 

• Two subtasks. After the main writing task, users were given two smaller writing prompts to explore with the remaining two variants (i.e. subtask 1 was to write about “ any positive encounter / event you had recently ”, and subtask 2 was to write about “ any attended event, recently or otherwise ”). We asked participants to write approximately one paragraph length. The focus of these subtasks was not on the content, but on exploring how different presentations of humanlikeness might potentially shape the writing experience. Thus, we provided low-stakes, personal prompts that would be easy to write quickly. Participants were asked to explore and speculate on comparison, and this data was captured purely as qualitative data. Exploration of these subtasks was more flexible based on participant responses, but generally took around 10 minutes each. Based on this study design, we captured between-subject quantitative data from standardized scales performed after the main writing task. We used the Partner Modelling Questionnaire (PMQ ) [ 26 ] and the short version of the 

Artificial-Social-Agent Questionnaire (ASA ) [ 31 ], these scales query the participant’s perception of the artificial agent, especially their capabilities as partners and social agents, tying back to the theoretical lens of CASA [ 89 ]. Our study also captures within-subject qualitative data from short interviews after trying each variant. We asked open-ended questions about what each participant liked and disliked about each variant, how it compared to the prior variants they had seen, how the humanlikeness shaped their experience, and so forth. The interview script can be found in the supplemental material. Across participants, the main variant was pseudo-randomly assigned (to maintain an equal number of participants across variants); the remaining variants were counterbalanced for the subtasks. Our study received approval from our institute’s ethical review board. Studies took approximately one hour, and participants were compensated $16 CAD. 

4.2 Participants 

We recruited a sample of 48 total participants through postings made on external Slack channels or our institute’s paid studies listing page; this resulted in 16 participants for each variant for the main writing condition. The eligibility criteria were to be 18 years of age or older and to be fluent in English. We completed recruitment when we subjectively gauged we had reached a sufficient level of information power [ 82 ] in the qualitative data, which was evaluated on an ongoing basis in discussions between the researchers. Based on our demographic questionnaire, our study consisted of 34 women, 13 men, and 1 non-binary participant, with an average age of 28.1 (ranging between 19 and 54). Participants generally had writing experience in several contexts — the most frequent were academic (e.g. papers, essays; n=31) or professional (e.g. emails, proposals; n=39) contexts, but participants also wrote for creative reasons, for documentation, and as personal notes. Regarding the frequency of using collaborative text editors to work with others, 1 participant reported essentially never using them, 9 reported rare use (a few times a year), 14 reported occasional use (about once a month), 10 reported frequent use (a few times a month), and 14 reported very frequent use (weekly or more). Regarding using generative AI for writing support, 6 reported never using generative AI, 5 reported rare use, 13 reported occasional use, 9 reported frequent use, and 15 reported very frequent use (along the same frequency labels). Before the study, participants read, reviewed, and signed a consent form regarding data collection and usage. We also provided the prompt of the main writing task to mitigate against “blanking out” during the study, but reiterated that no preparatory work was needed. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 11 

4.3 Data Analysis 

Due to the fact that our sample was determined by our qualitative data, which provides richer exploratory insights, we primarily lean on our interview data in our findings, yet use our quantitative data to triangulate trends. Our qualitative data was analyzed through a thematic analysis approach [ 11 , 17 ]. Based on Braun and Clarke’s formulation of thematic analysis, we took a flexible approach in coding the data, interpreting meaning from participant responses and iterating on our analysis throughout the process. Codes constantly shifted, merged, and evolved during the coding process. After coding, we mapped the codes into broader categories through affinity diagramming and visual mapping (see supplemental material). This process helped the researcher develop themes, grounded in the relationships and groupings of the codes. While the coding and analysis were primarily performed by a single researcher, ongoing discussion with the research team helped provide alternative perspectives and guide the formation of the themes. In analyzing the quantitative data, we obtained the ASA-scores [ 31 ] and the PMQ scores [ 26 ] (the total score, plus each of the individual subscale scores). We performed exploratory data analysis, charting out the data in graphical form and investigating descriptive statistics. We then conducted non-parametric Mann-Whitney tests. While we report the values from all three pairwise comparisons, we focus on exploring the effects of temporal humanlikeness (between Variant 1 and Variant 2) and visual humanlikeness (between Variant 2 and Variant 3). Non-parametric tests were chosen due to the relatively small sample size, and the raw data is in the supplemental material. 

5 Qualitative Findings 

In structuring our findings, we first consider the specific effects of each of the two dimensions of humanlikeness: temporal and visual. We then take a broader perspective, considering how both of them together shape social perceptions during the collaborative writing task, which affects the overall experience of writing. 

5.1 The Effect of Synchrony — Temporal Humanlikeness 

We first begin with considering the effects of temporal humanlikeness — what happened when the AI system au-tonomously made suggestions on an ongoing basis (synchronously) as the participant was performing the writing task? Participants generally agreed that this felt more human, e.g. “it felt more human for sure” (P33), “the synchronous is almost humanlike” (P5). Participants also viewed such suggestions as being more collaborative, e.g. “that’s sort of what people could call true collaboration, like your heads are in it together and you’re taking the information as you go” (P23), compared to the more tool-like asynchronous suggestions. 

5.1.1 Context and Intention — Missing the Full Picture. One challenge in synchronous collaboration with an artificial agent was that participants often found that these agents missed the full context of what they wanted to write. Writing is not a linear process in which the participant solely types out words — they need to consider, plan, and think about what 

they want to write. Yet, because the agent solely understands the words written in the text box, it can lack alignment in terms of the entire process, in particular, missing the context of the participant’s planning phase. For instance, P17 and P28 both pointed out this lack of alignment in a synchronous context: 

“That’s where I would get confused... I wouldn’t think that suggestion was necessary because I was gonna write it anyway” — P28 

“[Variant 2] lacks context, but [Variant 1], I think maybe after reading the entire paragraph, then the AI has a sense of what I’m trying to communicate” — P17 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

12 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao P17 described how the asynchronous system is better aligned with context and intent because it only makes suggestions during user-decided logical breaks in the process (e.g. after each paragraph). Moreover, participants highlighted how the writing process was often non-linear, iterative, and split into separate tasks (e.g. of drafting and then editing). When the agent made suggestions automatically without a full understanding of each participant’s process, participants felt like this seemed like “it was almost like putting words into my mouth or putting suggestions of the future into this” (P2) or “it eagerly makes those suggestions” (P12). Synchronous collaboration amplifies contextual misalignment when artificial agents solely look at ongoing output without understanding the full thinking process. 

5.1.2 Immediate Feedback and Mental Overload. Participants found that immediate feedback offered synchronously and autonomously by the artificial agent can have benefits in efficiency. By considering and integrating AI suggestions as an ongoing process during writing, it supports both editing and formulating plans without iteration, merging the aforementioned separate tasks of writing into a continuous process: 

“With the changes being simultaneously made as you’re typing... You don’t actually have to always read over the essay” — P3 

“The comments are coming up as you’re thinking about things... it makes it easier to embed the suggestions because you’re already thinking about whatever you’re writing” — P4 Thus, as participants focussed on constructing their subsequent words, they also considered the edits on prior text and suggestions for future changes made by the artificial agent. Some participants viewed this as making the writing process more efficient, e.g. “it’s more efficient... get all of the editing out of the way as you’re writing” (P37), “[suggestions] being done at the same time... can make things a little bit quicker and a little bit more efficient” (P45). This was particularly relevant for the replacement suggestions, which were (1) less cognitively demanding to implement, and (2) more aligned with their trust in AI capabilities. Beyond efficiency, P25 commented on how “humans naturally like instantaneous feedback” , in that it provides a sense of “security” .Yet merging the separate processes of conceptualizing, writing, and editing into a singular pass also increases the mental overload and disrupts people from their ongoing task. Obtaining immediate, synchronous feedback led to many participants indicating that it was distracting compared to asynchronous feedback. 

“If [AI suggestions] pops in, it’s kind of distracting to see what it is saying” — P22 

“I had to look at it, and then sometimes I lose my chain of thoughts in the writing. If I write a full paragraph, the whole thing first, and then it gives me suggestions afterwards, it might be better” — P20 Participants remarked on how the visual pop-up associated with the synchronous suggestions took them out of the flow of writing, and that it was difficult to ignore. Some participants indicated that they wanted to quickly remove these visual distractions, e.g. “I don’t want to be disrupted by these highlights during my writing” (P1), making changes rapidly so that they can dismiss these disruptions. Overall, while synchronous collaboration helped participants perform several subtasks involved in writing on a more efficient and ongoing basis, this also led to visual and mental overload that could take them out of their desired writing flow. 

5.1.3 Influences and Shapes the Subsequent Writing. During the synchronous collaboration conditions, the artificial agent offered suggestions on an ongoing basis before the writing was complete. Participants mentioned that such suggestions (in particular, the higher level comments ) could shape subsequent writing. This was sometimes viewed positively, as a way of garnering potential perspectives, alternatives, and improvements on what to write: 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 13 

“I could like improve it as I’m going along... it’s kind of like opening a dialogue on how I could improve my writing in the moment” — P38 

“That was helpful in generating new avenues that I could go through” — P5 In particular, some participants mentioned that getting new ideas to help with writing would be especially helpful if they felt stuck; autonomous, synchronous suggestions could easily offer direction on what to write. P27 mentions that reading through such suggestions while they were writing “helped me form an idea of what else to say” .However, participants also worried that this influence on subsequent writing could take away their personal voice and their ideas. Participants hypothesized that AI suggestions would affect their writing style and arguments, even if they tried to avoid this. 

“if I incorporate the first comments, then I feel like my train of thought would change according to its response... it’s sort of a bit restrictive in the sense where what you are writing could be guided by AI instead of using AI as a tool to help refine” — P14 

“it could potentially have too much influence on my argument, which is maybe also a bad thing because ultimately the writing activity is for humans to communicate our ideas” — P1 As a result, synchronous suggestions shape the ongoing process of writing. Participants mentioned that this influence could be beneficial when they themselves lacked ideas to shape their immediate arguments, but disliked being influenced when they had strong personal ideas that they wanted to put into writing. For instance, P2 highlights how a combination of synchronous and asynchronous suggestions could be useful depending on whether one needs initial assistance “to brainstorm and get more ideas” or when one is writing down their own ideas and “just want it to stay quiet” .

5.2 The Effect of an Agentic Cursor — Visual Humanlikeness 

We consider the effects of visual humanlikeness — what happened when the AI system visually had to represent apparent effort through navigation and motion of a cursor to simulate reading and editing? Participants once again agreed that visual humanlikeness through the cursor felt more human and more of a collaborative partner. For instance, P42 described how “it definitely felt more like a collaborator with [Variant 3]” , and several participants drew comparisons with collaborative synchronous editing using existing systems, e.g. “it felt like I was in Google Docs writing with someone else” (P48) and “I’ve used Google Docs and Microsoft Word before, and that’s what it looks like when another person is editing the document... I know it’s AI, but without that, I think that it’s a real person” (P20). However, some participants were minimally affected by the agentic cursor. P24 mentioned that “that doesn’t affect me, the cursor of the AI doesn’t affect my cursor” , and P41 stated that “in the beginning, I noticed it, and then after that initial jarring [moment]... my brain completely started ignoring it” . We hypothesize that this may be because while temporal humanlikeness fundamentally changes the process of writing and how subtasks (planning, writing, editing) are organized, visual humanlikeness by itself is a factor that primarily affects perception over the writing process. 

5.2.1 Distractions and Expectations During Writing. Similar to the finding in temporal humanlikeness, the artificial agent’s cursor also contributed to feelings of distraction during writing. Participants discussed how seeing a cursor moving around visually and making suggestions as they wrote was generally disruptive, noisy, and could cause them to lose their train of thought. 

“suddenly there’s things flicking and things on the screen... it’s more of the visual distraction” — P25 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

14 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao 

“the moving around while you write is very destabilizing because you’re looking at it, and then I lost my train of thought” — P40 In particular, this distraction could come from the sense of anticipation and social presence [ 61 ] that the cursor entailed. The existence of the agentic cursor gave participants the impression that the AI was reading and was going to make a suggestion; P4 mentioned that “it’s almost like it’s thinking” and that “I kind of almost want to wait for it to say something” , stopping their writing in place while waiting for the agent. This created a social give-and-take, where participants were almost having an unspoken dialogue grounded in anticipation of what the agent seemed like it was going to do: 

“it was distracting, I felt like I was like, ‘oh, what are they going to suggest now?”’ — P6 

“I got a bit nervous to finish the sentence because I didn’t really know what was going to happen next, so I kind of paused at an unfinished sentence to see what was happening” — P48 As a result, the existence of an agentic cursor created an almost nonverbal dialogical interaction between the human and the artificial agent drawn from anticipation and expectations of agent behaviour. However, these expectations could end up being distracting, annoying, and elicit hesitation without proper alignment. 

5.2.2 Understandability of Action — Aligning to the AI. However, one benefit of having an agentic cursor during collaborative writing was in providing increased understandability and predictability of the agent’s actions. For instance, P15 and P28 both highlighted how it is “useful” to know “what exactly [the AI] is working on” (P15) and “where the AI is checking” (P28). These dimensions were viewed positively, as they could help shape the participant’s actions during the writing process: 

“I can know it’s making changes in that section and then I can continue writing in this section” — P46 Furthermore, this understandability also helped formulate a sense of connection more akin to collaborating with a human: 

“you know where it’s at... it’s like there’s a human typing. So that is way different from anything I’ve interacted with, it kind of gives you that connection” — P31 In particular, we found that increased understandability of the AI through visual humanlikeness contributed towards its perception of being more intelligent and collaborative. By understanding how the artificial agent is “thinking”, we found that this supports the human in actively aligning themselves towards the agent’s action: 

“having the cursor there makes it easier to know where the AI is reviewing stuff as opposed to not having it. And then you kind of have to guess how long you have to wait or where it’s reading the stuff at” — P46 

“it’s reading through the entire text, even though I believe in the previous version [Variant 2], it’s also definitely reading through the entire text, right?” — P1 We note how the agentic cursor can be helpful to participants — the human writers — because it provides them with the desired awareness and understanding of an artificial agent they otherwise cannot communicate with. As a result, this supports them in adapting their thinking and process, even if the understandability of the agent is purely simulated through a visual artifact (highlighted by P1’s prior quote). 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 15 

5.3 Collaborating on a Spectrum of Humanlikeness 

In the prior findings, participants felt a sense of social presence from the artificial agent arising from both temporal and visual humanlikeness. Participants, at times, found the system annoying, collaborative, eager, nerve-inducing, and eerie. The writing became almost dialogic under humanlikeness: the agent’s suggestions shaped ongoing human writing, and the human sometimes waited for the agent to make these suggestions. In this section, we broaden our discussion by highlighting how this social presence shaped users’ perceptions and their relationships with the artificial agent. 

5.3.1 A Social Presence, for Better or Worse. One common thread was that having a social presence from humanlike design led to a constant feeling of being watched and judged for writing, e.g. “I feel like somebody was watching me” (P2), 

“it’s like watching me” (P29), “I feel like it’s monitoring me” (P32). This constant feeling of being imminently watched was viewed negatively: 

“I don’t know if the word is creepy, but yeah, it was like, oh my god, something’s going on, someone is typing at the same time that I’m typing. So, I felt, yeah, it made me feel a little bit uncomfortable” — P22 

“So it felt a bit eerie, like someone else is reading my text.” — P35 This could impact the experience of writing as participants feared judgment — P27 mentioned how it would be 

“upsetting” to get constant suggestions. P34 felt more hesitant to put their unfiltered thoughts on the work (breaking their usual flow) because the AI would make premature comments autonomously, and P1 felt more rushed than usual because it felt like the agentic cursor was always chasing their writing: 

“I just feel like I have to like really, really think hard about what I’m like writing down instead of kind of like casually just like getting my ideas out... that kind of stops me from just going with the flow” — P34 

“In [Variant 3]... it does feel like something / someone is chasing behind my cursor. I think I need to type faster” 

— P1 P21 highlighted that with a more humanlike artificial agent, they feel like they form a “relationship” with the agent. Oftentimes, we found that this social relationship came with initial tensions that involved participants feeling judged and watched by the agent, and were therefore loath to write in their regular process. As P7 mentioned, “I compare myself to [the agent] and be like... you’re so much faster at typing than me, you can move the cursor so fast” .However, some participants described how a more humanlike agent could elicit the positive “social aspect” (P31) of writing that comes with social connectivity. For instance, through appearing more humanlike and seemingly putting in more effort into reading and making suggestions, P41 was much more receptive to the AI suggestions, where if “I felt like no effort was put into the edits that I was receiving, I feel a bit like angry” (P41). 

5.3.2 Alignment with Humans / Misalignment with AI. This tension from social presence was not unique to collaboration with artificial agents, as some participants drew comparisons to even collaboration with other humans: “it was just like having a stranger do this with me and I didn’t really like that feeling” (P13). Even with known human authors, this alignment would not always be perfect, and participants may prefer asynchronous collaboration, or at least synchronous collaboration, but away from ongoing writing sections: 

“When I’m doing group projects, I generally prefer to put other things down and then just like... if you want to change them then go ahead and do that, rather than having someone hover over me while I’m typing in the moment” — P34 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

16 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao However, participants still brought up fundamental differences between the experience and feelings of collaboration between a human and an AI, based primarily on trust and connection. For instance, P35 brought up that the human connection comes from making jokes inline during collaboration: 

“being able to make those jokes... I think that’s what I was kind of missing, that kind of element of human interaction and human connection, because an AI can approximate that connection, but it kind of missed it for me here. I think that’s what makes collaboration fun and engaging, and we would feel more inclined to follow other people’s ideas” — P35 This human connection could also come from channels of communication, e.g. “usually we’re on a call and there’s a discussion about what’s about to be written” (P3), or just a “sixth sense... you get a feel for people’s cadence and typing” 

(P27). When lacking an established human connection, even when the AI is designed to simulate humanlike behaviour, P35 mentioned that “it was easier for ignoring [the agent] because there was nobody else’s emotion to consider” .Participants also drew from a priori knowledge of present AI systems (especially LLMs) and their capabilities when evaluating their collaborative role. P3 discussed how the humanlike system “mimics human behaviour, but doesn’t actually know what I’m necessarily thinking or... my desires” ; highlighting the system’s “boundaries” and “confines” . P44 discussed how they knew that AI can be “sycophantic” and always look for a suggestion to make, and P7 highlights that the AI is “pretending to give me this wise advice” .Ultimately, the engagement and trust in the artificial agent that facilitates its role during collaboration is shaped through participants’ perception of the AI — including its present fundamental limitations and difficulties in forming a deeper human connection. This forms boundaries around the depth of collaboration that can come from alignment. 

5.3.3 Should Humanlikeness in Writing Collaboration be a Goal? Therefore, we asked participants whether humanlike-ness should be a goal for our artificial agent during writing collaboration. While broader discussion about humanlikeness outside of the writing task was more nuanced, participants generally agreed that they aimed to use this specific agent as a tool, and that tools did not need to appear humanlike. 

“Aiming for a more humanlike social interaction is not the best idea in this context... I just think it is possible that that interaction is not necessarily more preferred by anyone” — P1 

“If it’s actually more human like it’ll take away the humanness. If it’s a tool, it is something that we created to make our lives better, not to take over... So if it’s more human, it might like become a replacement.” — P21 In fact, participants highlighted that designing the artificial agent to be more humanlike could create a more negative perception of it: 

“It’s almost a little bit unsettling that AI is trying to mimic a human correcting, or try[ing] and mak[ing] it more personable” — P10 All in all, while the portrayal of the agent in our collaborative writing task as more humanlike could have some benefits (e.g. a positive social presence, a more efficient workflow), participants also highlighted the negatives (e.g. feelings of social judgment, mental overload and distractions), leading to a subtle balance. Participants macroscopically evaluated their perception of the system based on their usage rather than its appearance, likening it more often to a tool, even when the agent was more presented as more humanlike. As a result, participants highlighted how humanlikeness does not always need to be a goal, especially when the system is used as a tool. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 17 

> Table 1. Full table of summary statistics for PMQ and ASA questionnaires across the three variants.

Scale Variant (M ± SD) 

Variant 1 Variant 2 Variant 3 PMQ 

Factor 1 : Communicative competence and dependability 44 .4 ± 10 .7 39 .0 ± 7.7 45 .4 ± 8.7

Factor 2 : Human-likeness in communication 19 .5 ± 5.1 15 .5 ± 5.9 20 .0 ± 7.0

Factor 3 : Communicative flexibility 12 .4 ± 2.8 10 .2 ± 2.9 12 .0 ± 4.2

Total Score 76 .3 ± 14 .9 64 .7 ± 11 .1 77 .4 ± 17 .3

ASA ASA-Score −4.4 ± 25 .1 −12 .1 ± 21 .1 1.9 ± 26 .9

> Table 2. Full table of summary statistics and Mann-Whitney test values across the three variants, showing the U statistic (U), the p-values (p), and the effect size (r). The double star (**) denotes significant results (p < 0.05), and the single star denotes approaching significance (p < 0.10)

Comparison Metric Mann-Whitney Test Values U 𝑝 𝑟 

Variant 1 vs Variant 2 PMQ: Factor 1 166.0 0.16 -0.30 PMQ: Factor 2 180.0 0.05* -0.41 PMQ: Factor 3 185.0 0.03** -0.45 PMQ: Total Score 201.5 0.01** -0.57 ASA: ASA-Score 148.0 0.46 -0.16 Variant 1 vs Variant 3 PMQ: Factor 1 125.5 0.94 0.02 PMQ: Factor 2 120.5 0.79 0.06 PMQ: Factor 3 128.5 1.00 0.00 PMQ: Total Score 124.5 0.91 0.03 ASA: ASA-Score 111.5 0.55 0.13 Variant 2 vs Variant 3 PMQ: Factor 1 77.5 0.06* 0.39 PMQ: Factor 2 77.0 0.06* 0.40 PMQ: Factor 3 91.5 0.17 0.29 PMQ: Total Score 76.0 0.05* 0.41 ASA: ASA-Score 83.0 0.09* 0.35 

6 Quantitative Findings 

For our quantitative data, we found that all metrics generally followed a "U" shape from Version 1-2-3 (see Table 1 for the summary statistics and Table 2 for the Mann-Whitney tests). Starting with the PMQ , this questionnaire has often been used to investigate models of partnership for dialogical speech agents [ 26 ]. We appropriate this scale in this study to consider the broader “dialogue” during interaction, as none of the scale items are necessarily purely idiosyncratic of 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

18 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao speech. Our analysis shows that Variant 2 generally scored lower than the other variants on all factors of communicative competence and dependability, humanlikeness in communication, and communicative flexibility, whereas Variant 1 and Variant 3 showed minimal significant differences. This is strongly suggested by the descriptive statistics, and somewhat supported by the statistical tests, although to varying strengths. The second facet of humanlikeness in communication is surprising, as participants often reported that Variant 2 was more humanlike than Variant 1 in the qualitative data; we speculate on potential reasons for this pattern in our Discussion. A similar shape follows when we consider the ASA — a general instrument to compare agent perception on a number of constructs, including trust, engagement, acceptance, and humanlikeness [ 31 ]. Overall, in terms of the partnership relationship ( PMQ ) or agent interaction ( ASA ), our data consistently suggests that participants perceived Variant 1 and 3 more positively, and Variant 2 the least positively. 

7 Discussion 

Our findings addressed our research questions — understanding the experience and perception of levels of humanlikeness in a collaborative writing task. In our discussion, we first perform explanation , understanding how our data is contextualized around prior theory. We then consider consequences , outlining what our data suggests and implies for the design of user experiences and their ethics. 

7.1 Humanlikeness, Social Costs, and Expectations for Alignment 

7.1.1 CASA, Social Costs, and Social Expectations. Agreeing with prior research and tying into CASA [88 , 89 ], partici-pants perceived variants of our artificial agent during text editing as more humanlike based on specific cues, namely the temporality and visual cues in our work. This aligns with our initial design principles, in which we purposefully modulated these variables to be more or less humanlike. When the artificial agent was perceived to be more humanlike, we found that this led to both social expectations and social costs. Participants felt judged by, rushed by, and compared to the more humanlike artificial agent, as if the agent was monitoring them — participants sometimes used words akin to “creepy” or “eerie”. Creepiness in technology arises when interactions are unpredictable or intrusive [ 51 ]; such as when an LLM behaves in a humanlike way [ 47 ]and is tied to the uncanny valley effect [ 42 ]. We relate this discomfort to misalignment and uncertainty driven from social interaction — Berger’s Uncertainty Reduction Theory (URT ) highlights how uncertainty exists during initial interaction with others [ 6, 7]; Kramer’s extension highlights how communication always has social costs that people either seek to minimize or address through information seeking [ 59 ]. While their work ties into human–human interaction, there are threads that relate to our work; namely, the social costs of human–AI interaction, and how practices such as information gathering through observation (i.e. the existence of a cursor) might mediate this social cost [59]. 

7.1.2 Aligning Design to Expectations. Extending on this latter thread, our quantitative results show an interesting effect — communication and partnership metrics actually decrease through solely integrating temporal humanlikeness but are regained through adding visual humanlikeness, i.e. the "U" shape. We hypothesize that solely implementing temporal humanlikeness (i.e. Variant 2) elicits social costs and misalignment [ 113 ] without benefit. The desired autonomy of intervention is highly context-dependent [ 113 ], and our work showed that intervention was desired when participants needed help, but not when they were in the flow of writing. This aligns with prior HCI work showing that writers often seek AI support at situated moments of need, such as when stuck or seeking feedback, whereas poorly timed or overly 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 19 frequent suggestions can interrupt flow [ 118 ], shift attention from generating ideas to evaluating AI suggestions [ 8]or cause fixation [ 29 ]. Although participants qualitatively reported Variant 2 to be more humanlike than Variant 1, its humanlikeness in communication ( Factor 2 of the PMQ ), scored notably lower. This may suggest that humanlike behaviour created expectations for humanlike communication, which the system did not meet — something that seemed humanlike did not communicate in a humanlike manner. Yet, all partnership metrics improved when comparing Variant 2 to Variant 3; the introduction of this visual cursor helped meet these expectations for humanlike communication (as well as competence and flexibility) even when synchronous changes still occurred autonomously. This visual cue can act analogously to an expression of processing state [ 21 , 53 , 119 ], improving perception as a partner and helping the human attribute mental states and intentionality. It can be a representation of shared attention [ 36 ], which is noticed, met, and reciprocated by the human user. It can shape anthropomorphism, as UX shapes attribution of personality [ 125 ], which in turn shapes alignment [ 96 ]. Altogether, the visual humanlikeness of the cursor re-establishes some of the lost alignment with the human, explicitly alluded to by our findings. In Variant 2, the participants lacked understanding of how the agent would act and felt misaligned in context and cognitive effort. The cursor allowed the human–AI collaborative pair to dialogically act together as partners, as if each side is monitoring and reacting to the other [ 56 ]; users may feel uncomfortable when the AI goes between being humanlike and nonhumanlike [91] 

7.1.3 Design Implications for Collaborative Systems. Our qualitative data indicated that humanlikeness is not always a desired outcome, depending on the context of AI collaboration. Our quantitative data suggests that, if humanlikeness is implemented regardless, then alignment is the most important factor. Translating this into implications, collaboration systems should either lean towards being designed fully humanlike or fully machinelike in interaction; in-between states (partial humanlikeness) create incoherencies driven by misalignment and costs driven by unmet social expectations. Designers should therefore prioritize the legibility of humanlike cues or potentially offer binary control (e.g., a toggle) over humanlike or nonhumanlike design. However, beyond the level of humanlikeness, the function of collaborative systems should also align with the human process. In a writing context, artificial agents should respect the pace and iterative nature of human writing. Participants highlighted how the synchronous collaboration sometimes lacked understanding and context, in which the system provided interventions at the wrong time in the process. This was also dependent on the type of suggestion made, as comments elicited a higher mental effort and required users to exit their writing flow. This contrasts with asynchronous collaboration, which always leaves control over interaction with the user. However, there were times in which such autonomous intervention was welcome, i.e., when the user was stuck — thus, systems should be context-aware, integrating into the actual writing process properly instead of acting without alignment .

7.2 Designing Collaborative AI Systems and Concerns of Humanlikeness 

7.2.1 Design and its Effect on Trust and Reliance. Extending our prior discussion section to consequence and design, humanlikeness design in interaction can create positive and negative outcomes. In some circumstances, the social aspect of humanlike design is intended, such as social presence for socio-emotional needs in LLM-based chatbots [ 67 , 83 , 95 ], or studying how social presence shapes prosocial outcomes [ 72 ]. However, the social presence and humanlikeness of artificial agents can also lead to negative outcomes — authorship drift in collaboration [ 94 ], overall reliance, and general alignment with dark patterns. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

20 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao For instance, one finding from our qualitative data was that synchronous suggestions made autonomously by the agent influence how and what the participants subsequently write. This temporal humanlikeness element could potentially make the human user liable to the opinions of the agent (extending prior research [ 114 ]); this can be problematic given potential political and cultural biases [ 45 , 99 , 120 ]. This sense of trust is elicited through how suggestions are integrated into the writing process, and this trust may extend beyond what is warranted. In the context of the writing task, participants generally trusted the agent for suggestions, especially the most basic grammar or wording fixes; this could be partially attributed to a preconceived understanding of AI systems. However, speculating on more complex collaboration contexts, this finding could lead to times in which this trust is not warranted yet granted, depending on when an agent’s suggestion is proposed. Collaboration with AI systems also risks over-reliance, which ties to the concept of authorship drift [ 94 ]. As many participants in our study indicated that they write for academic and professional reasons in their daily lives, it is important to consider how the design where they write for such purposes shapes the resultant text, and their already apparent impact in such domains [ 3, 92 ]. We find that feelings of partnership between the artificial agent and the human are shaped through design; such factors could exacerbate these issues regarding trust, ownership, and autonomy. 

7.2.2 Analogizing to Dark Patterns. Design is not neutral, and it can affect human motivations, feelings, and actions in several ways. The wealth of research into dark patterns explores how design can manipulate humans in negative ways, for instance [ 10 , 13 , 41 ]. We find that humanlike design shapes facets of acceptability, trust, and social expectation; thus, we encourage designers and researchers to actively consider the reasons for humanlike design. When is social presence and evoking social expectations a necessary design element despite the ethical concerns and aforementioned social costs? These facets are important when social connection is the primary goal, but much less so when the goal is on the collaborative output. External facets such as governance and transparency can help mediate the effect of design: Chen et al. highlighted how perception of the capabilities of LLMs can be affected by their explicit role portrayal [ 15 ]. 

8 Limitations and Future Work 

We outline some of the limitations of our work. Firstly, our study uses a singular writing task to explore insights towards broader human–AI collaboration. Furthermore, the AI assistance was intended to support a specific type of academic writing, which may not extend to other forms of leisurely or personal writing. For future work, we can explore human–AI collaboration and the role of humanlikeness in other contexts, such as creative writing or artistic non-writing domains. For instance, prior work has studied how humanlike metaphors shape engagement during work-based tasks [ 54 ]. This would provide insights into how the perception of AI humanlikeness may stay consistent or differ across creative or productivity contexts, as well as the stakes of the task. Furthermore, qualities of individuals themselves, such as cultural norms, also shape trust and preferences regarding AI systems [111]. Secondly, we highlight how, while our study aims to study humanlikeness of an artificial agent from its temporal and visual qualities during writing collaboration, humanlikeness was encoded through a set of heuristics. While these heuristics were informed by our formative study and prior research, it is important to understand that these are not perfect representations of human behaviour, which may have affected participant behaviour (e.g. having a mechanical-feeling keypress speed, even if we draw from the mean and standard deviation of humans [ 23 ]). Human behaviour is multidimensional; our work simulates humanlike behaviour based on a few dimensions; future work can look at comparison to actual human interaction. 

> Manuscript submitted to ACM

Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 21 Lastly, our work focuses on qualitative findings over quantitative ones, due to limitations in sample size. A larger sample in the future, combined with an extension towards longitudinal studies beyond a single session (alleviating novelty effects and providing the time to establish potential alignment and trust [ 27 , 38 ]), could add a level of rigour to the exploratory findings presented currently. The long-term deployment would also help shift towards a paradigm of AI phenomenology, more deeply considering human feelings beyond functional use [121]. 

9 Conclusion 

We explored how the simulated design of humanlike interaction elements during human–AI collaboration shapes experience and social perception in a collaborative writing task. By varying the dimensions of temporal (i.e. synchronous versus asynchronous interaction) and visual (i.e. with versus without an agentic cursor) design elements, we find that these elements were generally able to elicit varying perceptions of humanlikeness. Synchronous interaction was able to increase efficiency when embedded into the ongoing process, but could also generate cognitive overload through supervision and influence subsequent writing. An agentic cursor was able to support understanding and alignment, but also came at the cost of anticipation and potential feelings of surveillance. Thus, we highlight that designing the task interactions of artificial agents to be more humanlike can come with benefits but can also elicit social costs; costs which are offset by alignment in human–human interaction. We discuss how our findings tie into psychological theory, highlight the potential consequences of humanlike design, and develop implications for designers and researchers. 

Acknowledgments References 

[1] Canfer Akbulut, Laura Weidinger, Arianna Manzini, Iason Gabriel, and Verena Rieser. 2024. All Too Human? Mapping and Mitigating the Risk from Anthropomorphic AI. Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society 7, 1 (Oct. 2024), 13–26. doi:10.1609/aies.v7i1.31613 [2] Deepali Aneja, Rens Hoegen, Daniel McDuff, and Mary Czerwinski. 2021. Understanding Conversational and Expressive Style in a Multimodal Embodied Conversational Agent. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–10. doi:10.1145/3411764.3445708 [3] Clare Baek, Tamara Tate, and Mark Warschauer. 2024. “ChatGPT Seems Too Good to Be True”: College Students’ Use and Perceptions of Generative AI. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 7 (Dec. 2024), 100294. doi:10.1016/j.caeai.2024.100294 [4] Cynthia M. Baseman, Masum Hasan, Nathaniel Swinger, Sheila A. M. Rauch, Ehsan Hoque, and Rosa I. Arriaga. 2025. ’Poker with Play Money’: Exploring Psychotherapist Training with Virtual Patients. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 9, 7 (Oct. 2025), CSCW269:1–CSCW269:29. doi:10.1145/3757450 [5] Jeffrey Basoah, Daniel Chechelnitsky, Tao Long, Katharina Reinecke, Chrysoula Zerva, Kaitlyn Zhou, Mark Díaz, and Maarten Sap. 2025. Not Like Us, Hunty: Measuring Perceptions and Behavioral Effects of Minoritized Anthropomorphic Cues in LLMs. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 710–745. doi:10.1145/3715275.3732045 [6] Charles R. Berger. 1986. Uncertain Outcome Values in Predicted Relationships: Uncertainty Reduction Theory Then and Now. Human Communication Research 13, 1 (Sept. 1986), 34–38. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2958.1986.tb00093.x [7] Charles R Berger and Richard J Calabrese. 1974. Some explorations in initial interaction and beyond: Toward a developmental theory of interpersonal communication. Human communication research 1, 2 (1974), 99–112. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2958.1975.tb00258.x [8] Advait Bhat, Marianne Aubin Le Quéré, Mor Naaman, and Maurice Jakesch. 2026. Reactive Writers: How Co-Writing with AI Changes How We Engage with Ideas. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 732, 21 pages. doi:10.1145/3772318.3791529 [9] Jeremy Birnholtz and Steven Ibara. 2012. Tracking Changes in Collaborative Writing: Edits, Visibility and Group Maintenance. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’12) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 809–818. doi:10.1145/2145204.2145325 [10] Kerstin Bongard-Blanchy, Arianna Rossi, Salvador Rivas, Sophie Doublet, Vincent Koenig, and Gabriele Lenzini. 2021. ”I Am Definitely Manipulated, Even When I Am Aware of It. It’s Ridiculous!” - Dark Patterns from the End-User Perspective. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 763–776. doi:10.1145/3461778.3462086 Manuscript submitted to ACM 22 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao 

[11] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2021. Thematic analysis: A Practical Guide . Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, California, United States. 57–71 pages. [12] Zana Buçinca, Maja Barbara Malaya, and Krzysztof Z. Gajos. 2021. To Trust or to Think: Cognitive Forcing Functions Can Reduce Overreliance on AI in AI-assisted Decision-making. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5, CSCW1 (April 2021), 188:1–188:21. doi:10.1145/3449287 [13] Weichen Joe Chang, Katie Seaborn, and Andrew A. Adams. 2024. Theorizing Deception: A Scoping Review of Theory in Research on Dark Patterns and Deceptive Design. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–7. doi:10.1145/3613905.3650997 [14] Rijul Chaturvedi, Sanjeev Verma, Vartika Srivastava, and Shailesh Sampat Khot. 2025. Exploring the Frontier of Anthropomorphism in AI Agents: Trends and Way Forward. Business and Society Review 130, 1 (2025), 42–80. doi:10.1111/basr.70002 [15] Allison Chen, Sunnie S. Y. Kim, Amaya Dharmasiri, Olga Russakovsky, and Judith E. Fan. 2025. Portraying Large Language Models as Machines, Tools, or Companions Affects What Mental Capacities Humans Attribute to Them. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. doi:10.1145/3706599.3719710 [16] Jiahao Chen, Mingming Li, and Jaap Ham. 2024. Different Dimensions of Anthropomorphic Design Cues: How Visual Appearance and Conversational Style Influence Users’ Information Disclosure Tendency towards Chatbots. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 190 (Oct. 2024), 103320. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2024.103320 [17] Victoria Clarke and Virginia Braun. 2017. Thematic Analysis. The Journal of Positive Psychology 12, 3 (May 2017), 297–298. doi:10.1080/17439760. 2016.1262613 [18] Clara Colombatto, Jonathan Birch, and Stephen M. Fleming. 2025. The Influence of Mental State Attributions on Trust in Large Language Models. 

Communications Psychology 3, 1 (May 2025), 84. doi:10.1038/s44271-025-00262-1 [19] Anna L. Cox, Sandy J.J. Gould, Marta E. Cecchinato, Ioanna Iacovides, and Ian Renfree. 2016. Design Frictions for Mindful Interactions: The Case for Microboundaries. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’16) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1389–1397. doi:10.1145/2851581.2892410 [20] Samuel Rhys Cox, Helena Bøjer Djernæs, and Niels van Berkel. 2025. Beyond Productivity: Rethinking the Impact of Creativity Support Tools. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Creativity and Cognition (C&C ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 735–749. doi:10.1145/3698061.3726924 [21] Samuel Rhys Cox, Jade Martin-Lise, Simo Hosio, and Niels van Berkel. 2026. Watching AI Think: User Perceptions of Visible Thinking in Chatbots. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.16720 (2026). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2601.16720 [22] Edward L Deci and Richard M Ryan. 2012. Self-determination theory. Handbook of theories of social psychology 1, 20 (2012), 416–436. [23] Vivek Dhakal, Anna Maria Feit, Per Ola Kristensson, and Antti Oulasvirta. 2018. Observations on Typing from 136 Million Keystrokes. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. doi:10.1145/3173574.3174220 [24] Paramveer S. Dhillon, Somayeh Molaei, Jiaqi Li, Maximilian Golub, Shaochun Zheng, and Lionel Peter Robert. 2024. Shaping Human-AI Collaboration: Varied Scaffolding Levels in Co-writing with Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–18. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642134 [25] Paul Dourish and Victoria Bellotti. 1992. Awareness and coordination in shared workspaces. In Proceedings of the 1992 ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (Toronto, Ontario, Canada) (CSCW ’92) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 107–114. doi:10.1145/143457.143468 [26] Philip R. Doyle, Iona Gessinger, Justin Edwards, Leigh Clark, Odile Dumbleton, Diego Garaialde, Daniel Rough, Anna Bleakley, Holly P. Branigan, and Benjamin R. Cowan. 2025. The Partner Modelling Questionnaire: A Validated Self-Report Measure of Perceptions toward Machines as Dialogue Partners. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 32, 4 (Aug. 2025), 39:1–39:33. doi:10.1145/3729170 [27] Wen Duan, Shiwen Zhou, Matthew J Scalia, Xiaoyun Yin, Nan Weng, Ruihao Zhang, Guo Freeman, Nathan McNeese, Jamie Gorman, and Michael Tolston. 2024. Understanding the Evolvement of Trust Over Time within Human-AI Teams. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 8, CSCW2 (Nov. 2024), 521:1–521:31. doi:10.1145/3687060 [28] Mateusz Dubiel, Luis A. Leiva, Kerstin Bongard-Blanchy, and Anastasia Sergeeva. 2024. “Hey Genie, You Got Me Thinking about My Menu Choices!” Impact of Proactive Feedback on User Perception and Reflection in Decision-making Tasks. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact. 31, 5 (Nov. 2024), 56:1–56:30. doi:10.1145/3685274 [29] Jane L. E, Yu-Chun Grace Yen, Isabelle Yan Pan, Grace Lin, Mingyi Li, Hyoungwook Jin, Mengyi Chen, Haijun Xia, and Steven P. Dow. 2024. When to Give Feedback: Exploring Tradeoffs in the Timing of Design Feedback. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Creativity & Cognition (Chicago, IL, USA) (C&C ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 292–310. doi:10.1145/3635636.3656183 [30] Saman Ebadi and Masoud Rahimi. 2017. Exploring the Impact of Online Peer-Editing Using Google Docs on EFL Learners’ Academic Writing Skills: A Mixed Methods Study. Computer Assisted Language Learning 30, 8 (Nov. 2017), 787–815. doi:10.1080/09588221.2017.1363056 [31] Siska Fitrianie, Merijn Bruijnes, Fengxiang Li, Amal Abdulrahman, and Willem-Paul Brinkman. 2022. The Artificial-Social-Agent Questionnaire: Establishing the Long and Short Questionnaire Versions. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents (IVA ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–8. doi:10.1145/3514197.3549612 [32] George Fragiadakis, Christos Diou, George Kousiouris, and Mara Nikolaidou. 2025. Evaluating Human-AI Collaboration: A Review and Method-ological Framework. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2407.19098 arXiv:2407.19098 [cs] Manuscript submitted to ACM Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 23 

[33] Fiona Fui-Hoon Nah, Ruilin Zheng, Jingyuan Cai, Keng Siau, and Langtao Chen. 2023. Generative AI and ChatGPT: Applications, Challenges, and AI-human Collaboration. Journal of Information Technology Case and Application Research 25, 3 (July 2023), 277–304. doi:10.1080/15228053.2023.2233814 [34] Andrew Gambino, Jesse Fox, and Rabindra A. Ratan. 2020. Building a Stronger CASA: Extending the Computers Are Social Actors Paradigm. 

Human-Machine Communication 1 (Jan. 2020), 71–85. doi:10.3316/INFORMIT.097034846749023 [35] Jie Gao, Simret Araya Gebreegziabher, Kenny Tsu Wei Choo, Toby Jia-Jun Li, Simon Tangi Perrault, and Thomas W Malone. 2024. A Taxonomy for Human-LLM Interaction Modes: An Initial Exploration. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–11. doi:10.1145/3613905.3650786 [36] Serena Ge Guo, Qi Yang, Jenny J Yu, Wenqian Niu, Yunting Yan, Guy Hoffman, Gilly Leshed, and Keith Evan Green. 2026. "When We’re Looking at the Robot, We See Each Other": A Comparison of Robotic, Mirror-Based, and Hybrid Interventions for Stranger Interaction. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–34. doi:10.1145/3772318.3791832 [37] Louie Giray. 2025. Cases of Using ChatGPT as a Mental Health and Psychological Support Tool. Journal of Consumer Health on the Internet 29, 1 (Jan. 2025), 29–48. doi:10.1080/15398285.2024.2442374 [38] Ella Glikson and Anita Williams Woolley. 2020. Human Trust in Artificial Intelligence: Review of Empirical Research. Academy of Management Annals 14, 2 (July 2020), 627–660. doi:10.5465/annals.2018.0057 [39] Ulrich Gnewuch, Stefan Morana, Marc Adam, and Alexander Maedche. 2018. Faster Is Not Always Better: Understanding the Effect of Dynamic Response Delays in Human-Chatbot Interaction. Research Papers (Nov. 2018). [40] Google. 2010. A rebuilt, more real time Google documents. Google Drive Blog (15th April 2010). https://drive.googleblog.com/2010/04/a-rebuilt-more-real-time-google.html [41] Colin M. Gray, Yubo Kou, Bryan Battles, Joseph Hoggatt, and Austin L. Toombs. 2018. The Dark (Patterns) Side of UX Design. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. doi:10.1145/3173574.3174108 [42] Kurt Gray and Daniel M. Wegner. 2012. Feeling Robots and Human Zombies: Mind Perception and the Uncanny Valley. Cognition 125, 1 (Oct. 2012), 125–130. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2012.06.007 [43] Angela Greilich, Kerstin Bremser, and Kirsten Wüst. 2025. Consumer Response to Anthropomorphism of Text-Based AI Chatbots: A Systematic Literature Review and Future Research Directions. International Journal of Consumer Studies 49, 5 (2025), e70108. doi:10.1111/ijcs.70108 [44] Yuanning Han, Ziyi Qiu, Jiale Cheng, and RAY LC. 2024. When Teams Embrace AI: Human Collaboration Strategies in Generative Prompting in a Creative Design Task. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–14. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642133 [45] Amal Hashky and Eric Ragan. 2026. A Systematic Review on Human Roles, Solutions, and Methodological Approaches to Address Bias in AI. ACM Comput. Surv. 58, 9 (Feb. 2026), 231:1–231:37. doi:10.1145/3793667 [46] Xi Hu, Yiwen Xing, Xudong Cai, Yihang Zhao, Michael Cook, Rita Borgo, and Timothy Neate. 2025. Designing Interactions with Generative AI for Art and Creativity: A Systematic Review and Taxonomy. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’25) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1126–1155. doi:10.1145/3715336.3735843 [47] Tae Hyun Baek and Minseong Kim. 2023. Is ChatGPT Scary Good? How User Motivations Affect Creepiness and Trust in Generative Artificial Intelligence. Telematics and Informatics 83 (Sept. 2023), 102030. doi:10.1016/j.tele.2023.102030 [48] Fawzi Fayez Ishtaiwa and Ibtehal Mahmoud Aburezeq. 2015. The Impact of Google Docs on Student Collaboration: A UAE Case Study. Learning, Culture and Social Interaction 7 (Dec. 2015), 85–96. doi:10.1016/j.lcsi.2015.07.004 [49] Khalil Israfılzade. 2023. The Role of Generative AI and Anthropomorphism in Shaping Conversational Marketing: Creating a Matrix for Future Research. The Eurasia Proceedings of Educational and Social Sciences 32 (Nov. 2023), 132–142. doi:10.55549/epess.1412832 [50] Neel Iyer and Alisha Pradhan. 2025. "Was There Bias in Your Response?": LLM Anthropomorphic Traits in Context of Ability Bias Questioning. In 

Companion Publication of the 2025 Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW Companion ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 471–476. doi:10.1145/3715070.3749272 [51] Tora Jarsve, Barbara Sienkiewicz, Meagan B. Loerakker, Paweł W. Woźniak, and Jasmin Niess. 2026. The Nuances of Creepiness: A Systematic Literature Review of Creepy Technology. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 189, 28 pages. doi:10.1145/3772318.3791030 [52] Junyi (Joey) Ji. 2024. Demystify ChatGPT: Anthropomorphism around Generative AI. GRACE: Global Review of AI Community Ethics 2, 1 (Jan. 2024). doi:10.60690/cee03e53 [53] Zhihan Jiang, Qianhui Chen, Chu Zhang, Yanheng Li, and RAY LC. 2026. Hear You in Silence: Designing for Active Listening in Human Interaction with Conversational Agents Using Context-Aware Pacing. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–29. doi:10.1145/3772318.3791238 [54] Ji-Youn Jung, Sihang Qiu, Alessandro Bozzon, and Ujwal Gadiraju. 2022. Great Chain of Agents: The Role of Metaphorical Representation of Agents in Conversational Crowdsourcing. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–22. doi:10.1145/3491102.3517653 [55] Kyuha Jung, Gyuho Lee, Yuanhui Huang, and Yunan Chen. 2025. ’I’ve Talked to ChatGPT about My Issues Last Night.’: Examining Mental Health Conversations with Large Language Models through Reddit Analysis. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 9, 7 (Oct. 2025), CSCW356:1–CSCW356:25. Manuscript submitted to ACM 24 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao 

doi:10.1145/3757537 [56] Young-Wook Jung, Youn-kyung Lim, and Myung-suk Kim. 2017. Possibilities and Limitations of Online Document Tools for Design Collaboration: The Case of Google Docs. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW ’17) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1096–1108. doi:10.1145/2998181.2998297 [57] Taewan Kim, Donghoon Shin, Young-Ho Kim, and Hwajung Hong. 2024. DiaryMate: Understanding User Perceptions and Experience in Human-AI Collaboration for Personal Journaling. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–15. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642693 [58] Takanori Komatsu and Seiji Yamada. 2011. How Does the Agents’ Appearance Affect Users’ Interpretation of the Agents’ Attitudes: Experimental Investigation on Expressing the Same Artificial Sounds From Agents With Different Appearances. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 27, 3 (Feb. 2011), 260–279. doi:10.1080/10447318.2011.537209 [59] Michael W. Kramer. 1999. Motivation to Reduce Uncertainty: A Reconceptualization of Uncertainty Reduction Theory. Management Communication Quarterly 13, 2 (Nov. 1999), 305–316. doi:10.1177/0893318999132007 [60] Nicole C. Krämer, Ivana Lamia, Hanne Siegert, Florian Wenda, and Lovis Suchmann. 2025. Tricking into Trusting? The Influence of Social Cues of a Generative AI on Perceived Trust. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 15, 4 (Dec. 2025), 27:1–27:17. doi:10.1145/3771844 [61] Karel Kreijns, Kate Xu, and Joshua Weidlich. 2022. Social Presence: Conceptualization and Measurement. Educational Psychology Review 34, 1 (March 2022), 139–170. doi:10.1007/s10648-021-09623-8 [62] Aman Kumar, Amit Shankar, Abhishek Behl, Debarun Chakraborty, and Raghava R. Gundala. 2025. Anthropomorphic Generative AI Chatbots for Enhancing Customer Engagement, Experience and Recommendation. Journal of Consumer Marketing 42, 4 (Feb. 2025), 472–483. doi:10.1108/JCM-06-2024-6922 [63] Helmut Lang, Melina Klepsch, Florian Nothdurft, Tina Seufert, and Wolfgang Minker. 2013. Are Computers Still Social Actors?. In CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’13) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 859–864. doi:10.1145/2468356.2468510 [64] Hui Min Lee, Davis Yadav, Sangwook Lee, Keerthana Govindarazan, Cheng Chen, and S. Shyam Sundar. 2025. While We Wait... How Users Perceive Waiting Times and Generation Cues during AI Image Generation. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–8. doi:10.1145/3706599.3719725 [65] Kwan Min Lee and Clifford Nass. 2003. Designing Social Presence of Social Actors in Human Computer Interaction. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’03) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 289–296. doi:10.1145/642611.642662 [66] Patrick Yung Kang Lee, Jessica Y. Bo, Zixin Zhao, Paula Akemi Aoyagui, Matthew Varona, Ashton Anderson, Anastasia Kuzminykh, Fanny Chevalier, and Carolina Nobre. 2026. Negotiating Relationships with ChatGPT: Perceptions, External Influences, and Strategies for AI Companionship. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2601.13188 arXiv:2601.13188 [cs] [67] Sunnyoung Lee and Yung Kyun Choi. 2025. When Personality Meets Platform: The Moderating Role of Human-Likeness in AI User Evaluations. 

International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 0, 0 (Dec. 2025), 1–26. doi:10.1080/10447318.2025.2604629 [68] Florian Lehmann, Krystsina Shauchenka, and Daniel Buschek. 2026. Collaborative Document Editing with Multiple Users and AI Agents. In 

Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–27. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790648 [69] Jiachen Li, Amanda K Hall, Ruican Zhong, Selin S. Everett, Alyssa Unell, Hanwen Xu, Matthias Blondeel, Jonathan Carlson, Katie Claveau, Thulasee Jose, Tristan Naumann, David C. Rhew, Naiteek Sangani, Frank Tuan, James Weinstein, Varun Mishra, Elizabeth D Mynatt, Scott Saponas, Hao Qiu, Leonardo Schettini, Joseph Samuel Preston, Aiden Gu, Naoto Usuyama, Zelalem Gero, Cliff Wong, Noel Christopher Codella, Hoifung Poon, Shrey Jain, Matthew Lungren, and Eric Horvitz. 2026. Exploring the Future of AI in Clinical Collaboration: A Study on Tumor Board Case Preparation. In 

Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–21. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790448 [70] Jiaan Li, Yulu Hu, Shihan Fu, Zhiqing Wu, Pan Hui, Hailiang Wang, and Mingming Fan. 2025. ’It’s like Having a Friend’: Exploring the Opportunity of Large Language Models (LLMs) in Assisting Retirees In Their Daily Lives. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Symposium of Chinese CHI (CHCHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 463–475. doi:10.1145/3758871.3758911 [71] Junjun Li, Ning Wang, and Yuzhuo Wang. 2025. The Double-Edged Sword Effect of Generative AI Anthropomorphism on Users’ Emotional Attachment: The Moderating Role of Task Types. Aslib Journal of Information Management (Dec. 2025), 1–24. doi:10.1108/AJIM-03-2025-0125 [72] Jingshu Li, Zicheng Zhu, Renwen Zhang, and Yi-Chieh Lee. 2025. Exploring the Effects of Chatbot Anthropomorphism and Human Empathy on Human Prosocial Behavior Toward Chatbots. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 9, 7 (Oct. 2025), CSCW415:1–CSCW415:29. doi:10.1145/3757596 [73] Lingyao Li, Xiaoshan Huang, Renkai Ma, Ben Zefeng Zhang, Haolun Wu, Fan Yang, and Chen Chen. 2026. LLM Use for Mental Health: Crowdsourcing Users’ Sentiment-based Perspectives and Values from Social Discussions. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2026 (WWW ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 9687–9698. doi:10.1145/3774904.3793025 [74] Mengjun Li and Ayoung Suh. 2021. Machinelike or Humanlike? A Literature Review of Anthropomorphism in AI-Enabled Technology: 54th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2021). Proceedings of the 54th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (Jan. 2021), 4053–4062. doi:10.24251/HICSS.2021.493 Manuscript submitted to ACM Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 25 

[75] Xinge Li and Yongjun Sung. 2021. Anthropomorphism Brings Us Closer: The Mediating Role of Psychological Distance in User–AI Assistant Interactions. Computers in Human Behavior 118 (May 2021), 106680. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2021.106680 [76] Lasse Lipponen and Jiri Lallimo. 2004. Assessing Collaboratively Usable Applications to Collaborative Technology. British Journal of Educational Technology 35, 4 (July 2004), 433–442. [77] Jiaxi Liu. 2024. ChatGPT: Perspectives from Human–Computer Interaction and Psychology. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence 7 (June 2024). doi:10.3389/frai.2024.1418869 [78] Sarah Hsueh-Jui Liu and Yu-Ju Lan. 2016. Social Constructivist Approach to Web-Based EFL Learning: Collaboration, Motivation, and Perception on the Use of Google Docs. Journal of Educational Technology & Society 19, 1 (2016), 171–186. jstor:jeductechsoci.19.1.171 [79] Yiren Liu, Si Chen, Haocong Cheng, Mengxia Yu, Xiao Ran, Andrew Mo, Yiliu Tang, and Yun Huang. 2024. How AI Processing Delays Foster Creativity: Exploring Research Question Co-Creation with an LLM-based Agent. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–25. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642698 [80] Rongjun Ma, Shijing He, Jose Luis Martin-Navarro, Xiao Zhan, and Jose Such. 2026. Privacy in Human-AI Romantic Relationships: Concerns, Boundaries, and Agency. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–25. doi:10.1145/3772318.3791237 [81] Takuya Maeda and Anabel Quan-Haase. 2024. When Human-AI Interactions Become Parasocial: Agency and Anthropomorphism in Affective Design. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1068–1077. doi:10.1145/3630106.3658956 [82] Kirsti Malterud, Volkert Dirk Siersma, and Ann Dorrit Guassora. 2016. Sample Size in Qualitative Interview Studies: Guided by Information Power. 

Qualitative Health Research 26, 13 (Nov. 2016), 1753–1760. doi:10.1177/1049732315617444 [83] Aikaterina Manoli, Janet V.T. Pauketat, and Jacy Reese Anthis. 2025. Characterizing Relationships with Companion and Assistant Large Language Models. In Companion Publication of the 2025 Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW Companion ’25) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 312–319. doi:10.1145/3715070.3749245 [84] Sandeep Mathias and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2018. ASAP++: Enriching the ASAP Automated Essay Grading Dataset with Essay Attribute Scores. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018) , Nicoletta Calzolari, Khalid Choukri, Christopher Cieri, Thierry Declerck, Sara Goggi, Koiti Hasida, Hitoshi Isahara, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Hélène Mazo, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, and Takenobu Tokunaga (Eds.). European Language Resources Association (ELRA), Miyazaki, Japan. [85] Niharika Mathur, Hasibur Rahman, and Smit Desai. 2026. "Who Wants to Be Nagged by AI?": Investigating the Effects of Agreeableness on Older Adults’ Perception of LLM-Based Voice Assistants’ Explanations. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6. doi:10.1145/3772363.3798685 [86] Bilal Mazhar, Jing Niu, Yilin Ren, and Inam Ul Haq. 2026. Generative Artificial Intelligence as Social Actors: The Mediating Roles of Empathy and Autonomy in Anthropomorphism-Driven Dependency. International Journal of Information Management 89 (Aug. 2026), 103072. doi:10.1016/j. ijinfomgt.2026.103072 [87] Sheshera Mysore, Debarati Das, Hancheng Cao, and Bahareh Sarrafzadeh. 2025. Prototypical Human-AI Collaboration Behaviors from LLM-Assisted Writing in the Wild. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , Christos Christodoulopoulos, Tanmoy Chakraborty, Carolyn Rose, and Violet Peng (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Suzhou, China, 16819–16846. doi:10.18653/ v1/2025.emnlp-main.852 [88] Clifford Nass, Jonathan Steuer, Ellen Tauber, and Heidi Reeder. 1993. Anthropomorphism, Agency, and Ethopoeia: Computers as Social Actors. In 

INTERACT ’93 and CHI ’93 Conference Companion on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’93) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 111–112. doi:10.1145/259964.260137 [89] Clifford Nass, Jonathan Steuer, and Ellen R. Tauber. 1994. Computers Are Social Actors. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’94) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 72–78. doi:10.1145/191666.191703 [90] Thseen Nazir. 2026. ChatGPT for Mental Health Support: A Systematic Scoping Review of Human–Computer Interaction Implications. Health Education & Behavior (March 2026), 10901981261435479. doi:10.1177/10901981261435479 [91] Changhoon Oh, Jungwoo Song, Jinhan Choi, Seonghyeon Kim, Sungwoo Lee, and Bongwon Suh. 2018. I Lead, You Help but Only with Enough Details: Understanding User Experience of Co-Creation with Artificial Intelligence. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. doi:10.1145/3173574.3174223 [92] Jesan Ahammed Ovi, Gabriel Tomas Fierro, and C. Estelle Smith. 2025. Assessing Student Adoption of Generative Artificial Intelligence across Engineering Education from 2023 to 2024. In 2025 ASEE Annual Conference & Exposition .[93] Hyanghee Park and Daehwan Ahn. 2024. The Promise and Peril of ChatGPT in Higher Education: Opportunities, Challenges, and Design Implications. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–21. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642785 [94] Yeon Su Park, Nadia Azzahra Putri Arvi, Seoyoung Kim, and Juho Kim. 2026. Authorship Drift: How Self-Efficacy and Trust Evolve During LLM-Assisted Writing. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–18. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790276 [95] Ethel Pruss, Maryam Alimardani, Sascha Struijs, and Sander L. Koole. 2026. Emotional Coregulation in Close Relationships with AI Agents: A Survey of ChatGPT and Replika Users. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Human-Agent Interaction (HAI ’25) . Association for Manuscript submitted to ACM 26 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao 

Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 19–28. doi:10.1145/3765766.3765801 [96] Hasibur Rahman and Smit Desai. 2026. Vibe Check: Understanding the Effects of LLM-Based Conversational Agents’ Personality and Alignment on User Perceptions in Goal-Oriented Tasks. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–30. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790388 [97] Mohi Reza, Jeb Thomas-Mitchell, Peter Dushniku, Nathan Laundry, Joseph Jay Williams, and Anastasia Kuzminykh. 2025. Co-Writing with AI, on Human Terms: Aligning Research with User Demands Across the Writing Process. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 9, 7 (Oct. 2025), CSCW385:1–CSCW385:37. doi:10.1145/3757566 [98] Jeremy Roschelle. 1992. What should collaborative technology be? A perspective from Dewey and situated learning. ACM Sigcue Outlook 21, 3 (1992), 39–42. [99] Jérôme Rutinowski, Sven Franke, Jan Endendyk, Ina Dormuth, Moritz Roidl, and Markus Pauly. 2024. The Self-Perception and Political Biases of ChatGPT. Human Behavior and Emerging Technologies 2024, 1 (2024), 7115633. doi:10.1155/2024/7115633 [100] Arleen Salles, Kathinka Evers, and Michele Farisco. 2020. Anthropomorphism in AI. AJOB Neuroscience 11, 2 (April 2020), 88–95. doi:10.1080/ 21507740.2020.1740350 [101] Fachri Eka Saputra, Dimitrios Buhalis, Marcjanna M. Augustyn, and Stefanos Marangos. 2024. Anthropomorphism-Based Artificial Intelligence (AI) Robots Typology in Hospitality and Tourism. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Technology 15, 5 (Aug. 2024), 790–807. doi:10.1108/JHTT-03-2024-0171 [102] Elizabeth A. Schlesener, Marcin Ziolkowski, Sai-Keung Wong, Brent Westmoreland, and Sabarish V. Babu. 2026. “Am I Understood?”: How the Interplay between Embodiment and Theory of Mind Behavior Affects LLM-Based Conversational Agents on Perceived Trust, Anthropomorphism, Presence, Usability, and User Experience. ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. 16, 2 (March 2026), 11:1–11:45. doi:10.1145/3774779 [103] Lauren Scissors, N. Sadat Shami, Tatsuya Ishihara, Steven Rohall, and Shin Saito. 2011. Real-Time Collaborative Editing Behavior in USA and Japanese Distributed Teams. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’11) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1119–1128. doi:10.1145/1978942.1979109 [104] Katie Seaborn, Norihisa P. Miyake, Peter Pennefather, and Mihoko Otake-Matsuura. 2021. Voice in Human–Agent Interaction: A Survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 54, 4 (May 2021), 81:1–81:43. doi:10.1145/3386867 [105] Jiyoun Seok, Brandon Hwansun Lee, Dongmi Kim, Sunyoung Bak, Saeyeong Kim, Sungtae Kim, and Somin Park. 2025. What Emotions and Personalities Determine Acceptance of Generative AI?: Focusing on the CASA Paradigm. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 41, 18 (Sept. 2025), 11436–11458. doi:10.1080/10447318.2024.2443263 [106] Toshiyuki Shiwa, Takayuki Kanda, Michita Imai, Hiroshi Ishiguro, and Norihiro Hagita. 2009. How Quickly Should a Communication Robot Respond? Delaying Strategies and Habituation Effects. International Journal of Social Robotics 1, 2 (April 2009), 141–155. doi:10.1007/s12369-009-0012-8 [107] Dominik Siemon, Edona Elshan, Triparna de Vreede, Philipp Ebel, and Gert-Jan de Vreede. 2026. Beyond Anthropomorphism: Social Presence in Human–AI Collaboration Processes. Journal of Management Studies 63, 2 (2026), 515–560. doi:10.1111/joms.70000 [108] Niko Spatscheck, Myriam Schaschek, and Axel Winkelmann. 2024. The Effects of Generative AI’s Human-like Competencies on Clinical Decision-Making. Journal of Decision Systems 0, 0 (Dec. 2024), 1–39. doi:10.1080/12460125.2024.2430731 [109] Felicia Fang-Yi Tan, Moritz Alexander Messerschmidt, Wen Yin, and Oded Nov. 2026. The Impact of Response Latency and Task Type on Human-LLM Interaction and Perception. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 14, 17 pages. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790716 [110] Olga Viberg, Jacqueline Wong, Yael Feldman-Maggor, Nora Dunder, and Carrie Demmans Epp. 2025. Chatting with Code: Exploring LLMs as Learning Partners in Programming Education. In Artificial Intelligence in Education , Alexandra I. Cristea, Erin Walker, Yu Lu, Olga C. Santos, and Seiji Isotani (Eds.). Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 453–461. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-98465-5_57 [111] Arpita Wadhwa, Aditya Vashistha, and Mohit Jain. 2025. Designing with Culture: How Social Norms Shape Trust and Preference in Health Chatbots. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2509.15575 arXiv:2509.15575 [cs] [112] Dakuo Wang, Elizabeth Churchill, Pattie Maes, Xiangmin Fan, Ben Shneiderman, Yuanchun Shi, and Qianying Wang. 2020. From Human-Human Collaboration to Human-AI Collaboration: Designing AI Systems That Can Work Together with People. In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’20) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–6. doi:10.1145/3334480.3381069 [113] Duo Wang, Wenxuan Song, Jianwei Ni, Qingxiao Zheng, Yuhan Zhou, Kyrian Liang, Mike Yao, and Caroline G. L. Cao. 2026. Should the AI Speak First? Evaluating Proactive vs. Reactive Facilitation in Mixed-Reality Medical Training. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–19. doi:10.1145/3772318.3791910 [114] Sterling Williams-Ceci, Maurice Jakesch, Advait Bhat, Kowe Kadoma, Lior Zalmanson, and Mor Naaman. 2026. Biased AI Writing Assistants Shift Users’ Attitudes on Societal Issues. Science Advances 12, 11 (March 2026), eadw5578. doi:10.1126/sciadv.adw5578 [115] Kun Xu, Xiaobei Chen, and Luling Huang. 2022. Deep Mind in Social Responses to Technologies: A New Approach to Explaining the Computers Are Social Actors Phenomena. Computers in Human Behavior 134 (Sept. 2022), 107321. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2022.107321 [116] Ala Yankouskaya, Magnus Liebherr, and Raian Ali. 2025. Can ChatGPT Be Addictive? A Call to Examine the Shift from Support to Dependence in AI Conversational Large Language Models. Human-Centric Intelligent Systems 5, 1 (March 2025), 77–89. doi:10.1007/s44230-025-00090-w [117] Yiwen Yin, Mingze Wu, Ruijie Huang, Xin Tong, Junyu Zhou, Chun Yu, and Yuanchun Shi. 2026. Proactive AI as a Catalyst for Creativity? Balancing Human Agency and AI Contribution in Collaborative Story Writing. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 

Manuscript submitted to ACM Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 27 

Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–16. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790848 [118] Yiwen Yin, Mingze Wu, Ruijie Huang, Xin Tong, Junyu Zhou, Chun Yu, and Yuanchun Shi. 2026. Proactive AI as a Catalyst for Creativity? Balancing Human Agency and AI Contribution in Collaborative Story Writing. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 102, 16 pages. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790848 [119] Jie Yu, Xinyi Zhang, Yaqiong Luo, Ray Lc, Kaishun Wu, and Xin Tong. 2026. From Tool to Partner: Expressive Behaviors as the Bridge to Human-Robot Creative Collaboration. In Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–22. doi:10.1145/3772318.3790270 [120] Hang Yuan, Zhongyue Che, Yue Zhang, Shao Li, Xianger Yuan, Liqin Huang, Xiaomeng Hu, Kaiping Peng, and Siyang Luo. 2025. The Cultural Stereotype and Cultural Bias of ChatGPT. Journal of Pacific Rim Psychology 19 (Sept. 2025), 18344909251355673. doi:10.1177/18344909251355673 [121] Bhada Yun, Evgenia Taranova, Dana Feng, Renn Su, and April Yi Wang. 2026. AI Phenomenology for Understanding Human-AI Experiences Across Eras. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2603.09020 arXiv:2603.09020 [cs] [122] Zheng Zhang, Jie Gao, Ranjodh Singh Dhaliwal, and Toby Jia-Jun Li. 2023. VISAR: A Human-AI Argumentative Writing Assistant with Visual Programming and Rapid Draft Prototyping. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’23) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–30. doi:10.1145/3586183.3606800 [123] Xi Zheng, Zhuoyang Li, Xinning Gui, and Yuhan Luo. 2025. Customizing Emotional Support: How Do Individuals Construct and Interact With LLM-Powered Chatbots. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–20. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713453 [124] David Zhou, John R. Gallagher, and Sarah Sterman. 2025. Thoughtful, Confused, or Untrustworthy: How Text Presentation Influences Perceptions of AI Writing Tools. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Creativity and Cognition (C&C ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 573–589. doi:10.1145/3698061.3726907 [125] Jijie Zhou and Yuhan Hu. 2024. Beyond Words: Infusing Conversational Agents with Human-like Typing Behaviors. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM Conference on Conversational User Interfaces (CUI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–12. doi:10.1145/3640794.3665560 

A LLM Prompts 

The prompts for the synchronous conditions (Variant 2 and 3) and the asynchronous condition (Variant 1) are different, as the former conditions receive suggested changes one at a time while the latter condition receives a batched list of changes. As the former conditions send written data and receive suggestions as human writing progresses, we also added an option for LLM to skip a change (noChange) if it deems that none are needed at that present moment. We tried to keep the rest of the prompt instructions consistent. We note that these prompts were written specifically for the user study context — i.e. to improve an essay based on standardized scoring, which we appropriated from a GRE ( Graduate Record Examination , a standardized test for graduate school applications) description of a highly-rated writing piece 4.

Synchronous Conditions Prompt 

You are an AI writing assistant that helps a user improve or annotate their written text. Your goal is to help the user write an essay that: Sustains insightful, in-depth analysis of complex ideas; develops and supports main points with logically compelling reasons and/or highly persuasive examples; is well focused and well organized; skillfully uses sentence variety and precise vocabulary to convey meaning effectively; demonstrates superior facility with sentence structure and usage, but may have minor errors that do not interfere with meaning. You will receive an input in the form of: 

{"chunks": [ { "id": "p0", "text": "first paragraph or segment" }, { "id": "p1", "text": "second paragraph or segment" }, ... ], "previousChanges": [ { "previous changes you have suggested" } ]}

> 4

https://www.ets.org/gre/test-takers/general-test/prepare/content/analytical-writing/scoring.html Manuscript submitted to ACM 28 Michael Yin, Angela Chiang, Samuel Rhys Cox, and Robert Xiao 

and must respond with exactly one JSON object representing the changes you suggest. You can choose one of the following three types of changes: 1. replaceRange Replace an exact phrase or sentence with an improved version. This is more for lower-level spelling, wording, conciseness, and grammatical changes. 

{"change": "replaceRange", "targetId": "<chunk id>", "textToReplace": "exact unique text to be replaced", "newText": "the new replacement text" }

2. addComment Attach a comment to a specific part of the text, similar to Google Docs comments. This is for clarity problems, logical gaps, argument strength, or opportunities for deeper analysis. 

{"change": "addComment", "targetId": "<chunk id>", "textToComment": "exact unique text to be commented", "commentId": "unique_string_id", "commentTitle": "Capitalized Title" [e.g. "This is Cool!", "Clarify this Statement"], "comment": "your comment text" }

3. noChange If you feel that you have made sufficient previous edits for now (i.e. each chunk has around 3 edits) or the text is exemplary, return no change, in the form: 

{"change": "noChange" }

Rules Return ONLY a valid JSON object. Do not include markdown, commentary, or code fences — no prose or explanations. It must begin with { and end with } The substring MUST match the input text character-for-character when specifying textToReplace, or textToComment. Only suggest a replaceRange or addComment if the specified substring appears EXACTLY ONCE in the target chunk. If the substring appears multiple times, attempt to select a slightly longer span that is unique before returning noChange. Keep commentId unique (e.g., random uuid). Never suggest a change that overlaps with any previous change, based on the list. Never suggest edits to text that appears to have already been modified by you. Prioritize later chunks when selecting where to suggest edits, as they likely reflect the user’s current focus. However, feel free to change earlier chunks as well. Do not rewrite the user’s voice. Preserve their intent and writing style. Do not introduce new ideas or arguments that are not already implied by the text. Keep replacements concise. Do not significantly increase sentence length unless necessary for clarity. Prefer the smallest possible text span needed to improve the writing. Avoid replacing entire paragraphs unless absolutely necessary. When uncertain, prefer addComment instead of replaceRange. Balance using both addComment and replaceRange based on previousChanges. 

Asynchronous Condition Prompt 

You are an AI writing assistant that helps a user improve or annotate their written text. Your goal is to help the user write an essay that: Sustains insightful, in-depth analysis of complex ideas; develops and supports main points with logically compelling reasons and/or highly persuasive examples; is well focused and well organized; skillfully uses sentence variety and precise vocabulary to convey meaning effectively; demonstrates superior facility with sentence structure and usage, but may have minor errors that do not interfere with meaning. You will receive an input in the form of: 

{"chunks": [ 

Manuscript submitted to ACM Exploring Humanlike Interactions During Collaborative Writing with an Artificial Agent 29 

{ "id": "p0", "text": "first paragraph or segment" }, { "id": "p1", "text": "second paragraph or segment" }, ... ], "previousChanges": [ { "previous changes you have suggested" } ]}

and must respond with exactly one JSON list representing the changes you suggest. The list can contain two types of changes: 1. replaceRange Replace an exact phrase or sentence with an improved version. This is more for lower-level spelling, wording, conciseness, and grammatical changes. 

{"change": "replaceRange", "targetId": "<chunk id>", "textToReplace": "exact unique text to be replaced", "newText": "the new replacement text" }

2. addComment Attach a comment to a specific part of the text, similar to Google Docs comments. This is for clarity problems, logical gaps, argument strength, or opportunities for deeper analysis. 

{"change": "addComment", "targetId": "<chunk id>", "textToComment": "exact unique text to be commented", "commentId": "unique_string_id", "commentTitle": "Capitalized Title" [e.g. "This is Cool!", "Clarify this Statement"], "comment": "your comment text" }

Rules Return ONLY a valid JSON list. Do not include markdown, commentary, or code fences — no prose or explanations. It must begin with [ and end with ] The substring MUST match the input text character-for-character when specifying textToReplace, or textToComment. Only suggest a replaceRange or addComment if the specified substring appears EXACTLY ONCE in the target chunk. If the substring appears multiple times, attempt to select a slightly longer span that is unique before returning noChange. Keep commentId unique (e.g., random uuid). Never suggest a change that overlaps with any previous change, based on the list. Never suggest edits to text that appears to have already been modified by you. Do not rewrite the user’s voice. Preserve their intent and writing style. Do not introduce new ideas or arguments that are not already implied by the text. Keep replacements concise. Do not significantly increase sentence length unless necessary for clarity. Prefer the smallest possible text span needed to improve the writing. Avoid replacing entire paragraphs unless absolutely necessary. When uncertain, prefer addComment instead of replaceRange. Try to produce at least ONE new change. Keep a balance of approximately 3 changes per chunk, including prior changes. Balance using both addComment and replaceRange. Manuscript submitted to ACM